to become thin at a point. hepisiprou.

she ate quickly, bringing her hands to her mouth, it is known that the picures eat quickly. wapu a ha the waruwarumoma, thomi pe iyai ma re ropewei.

to eat very quickly, placing food in the palm of the hand. waruwarumoma.

the cotton hammocks get impregnated with the strong smell of the brew that the hekura use to kill. watota ke u nakini yii ke ki ni watota re ke ki rukerayoma (cha.

to impregnate with a strong smell, to give off a strong smell. rukerayoma.

without losing an instant Toucan leaned his arrows. mayepirithawe shereka ke ki rakitaa ha yaimakini (mit.

his arrows. yaimakini.

immerse yourselves in the river immediately. pe ta ithoa shoaparu.

to immerse oneself in water. ithooprou.

cultivated plant, variety of ocumo; Xanthosoma sagittifolium (Araceae). makami.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically for a while. imiki yokoyokomu.

to look at in a state. reiaprarou.

to perforate (synonym). tiwehe.

to pile tobacco leaves on top of each other and make balls to keep them dry. pee nahe ithori.

to finish doing something. poteteprou.

to be straight, correct, right. ihita.

they climbed (the mountain) and Kasimi felt vertigo. pe ha yãmothoni kasimi a shi kirihotayoma.

to climb (a mountain). yãmothoni.

to be locally narrow (hole, opening). teteã.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they arrived at the summit of the Gallineta mountain. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe (mit.

to arrive at the summit. pororoaihe.

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. hushomiprou.

he sent the one who was alert to live on a rock. a puhi re moyawei iha, pe shimai piyekou ha kuparuni.

to send someone somewhere; to return someone (to their home). moyawei.

a little light. rehehe.

cotton fiber, cotton. uko.

the fish are cooking (in water). yuri pe harii.

to cook in water, to boil in water. hari.

I didn't watch where the arrow went. shereka ya no taanomi.

to observe, to watch, to follow with the gaze. taanomi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). shonipi.

plant. krããma.

he removed several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to remove several banana shoots by digging the ground with the tip of a machete. tikareakei.

to not feel very well. tharehai.

to become thin, to thin out. hepisiai.

to amplify (noise, voice). nakepramai.

to make someone/something go down abruptly from a hammock. wahehepramai.

the night surprised them, and the noises of the darkness were heard. yetu ke the pe he itututou ha yaironi, titiri pe heã kuprou shoarayoma.

to be surprised by night. itututou.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to tear off a piece by pulling in one direction with the teeth and in the other with the fingers; an object from which a piece has been torn off in this way. wakokoa.

whirlpool, vortex. motohewe.

to whom shall I give it. weti ke iha ya hipeape.

to whom, to whose house. hipeape.

to indispose visitors by looking at them eat. maikaprai: indisponer a visitantes mirándolos comer.

indispose visitors. maikaprai.

to strike each other with the paw during a fight (a bird). kakekayou.

to turn over, to tip over easily. hotetai.

he grabbed a liana (with which) he pulled the tree towards himself (pulling to make the trunk lean). thoo thotho ha yãkãreni, the itutua ahetea totihikema.

the jaguar attacked the hekura, grabbed one of them brusquely and tore it in two. irani hekura ke pe nape keo ha kuparuni, hekura ai a wai re yãkãreiwei, a re kakaprareiwei (cha.

to grab brusquely, to catch in mid-air. yãkããi.

to be a little hard. fhihuhu-.

to be arched, curved upwards. kreethe.

sharpen the ear. opo-.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). arererayou.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to start reflecting quickly. piyeketou.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to submerge, sink momentarily under water. paot.

to lift without effort, for an instant. herehetarei.

come to see for a moment. the ta mipraa.

Rabipelado was glancing (towards the scene unfolding). nãroriwe the re mitareiwei.

to go to see repeatedly; to look for a moment. mipraayo.

I rub the wapu fruits against the bottom of a basket. wapu ya ki hipii.

to rub toxic cooked fruits against the wall of a basket (s h o t e), after having soaked them for some time. hipii.

he carried (on his back) two children with shaved heads. e naha ihiru ke kipi he mãrokoshi kuwe, ke kipi re tikemapoheriiwei.

to carry on one. tikemapoheriiwei.

"wa, wa, wa. "wa, wa, wa. ", the váquiros walked in a line one behind the other. ", ware ke ki kuu kãi tutuatayoma (mit.

we walked in a line and heard the women crying. yamaki re tutuaiwei, suwe re pe miã kuoma.

to walk in a line one behind the other. tutuama.

ritual of isolation and purification performed by women having their first period (and their husbands); ritual state of those who have committed or participated in a homicide. unokai mou.

ritual state of a woman having her first period, and of a homicide (or someone who has participated in a homicide). unokai.

to tell someone to begin softening an object or to soften it locally. fepehea.

they immediately threw out fragments of the sipara rock (hitting it). sipara keki ãshãkãri yutuhamai shoapariyoma (mit.

to throw out, expel, eject, make jump far away. yutuhamai.

reserved. reservan.

don't lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

to die, to kill. nomari.

(she) kills the konakona ants with embers, striking firebrands against each other (in this example the pronoun wahe you two refers to a single person: it is a mother-in-law addressing her son-in-law). konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to scatter embers by striking firebrands against each other (to drive away and kill ants). yashishai.

to be planted vertically in the ground (an elongated object). estar plantado verticalmente en el suelo (un objeto alargado).

planted. plantado.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved, whose opening is twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

curved, twisted. tapariyo.

to split in two. pahathoprai.

butterfly (diurnal). uwãuwã.

magnificent, Dormilona swayed in the middle of the group. wathaperariwe re a noshi harirawe krei kupariyoma.

to soften, to become soft. krããhãã.

to cut in two. pakaroprai.

to be very hungry. potipotimi.

—Brother-in-law, is that really you. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe. —Yes, it's really me. —awei ke, kamiye ke.

to clean, to tidy up, to paint or color white; to let something whiten. aumai.

we followed the watercourse downstream and (scared away) paujíes that took flight. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. werepokirini.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying the torso and arms. rahumo.

to hang upside down (perfective form). ihohokei.

it is up there. isi hami the kua.

on top, at the summit. fisi hami.

ser conversador. wã kashu.

to be talkative. kashu.

to go around in circles, to describe circles. katitihu.

to break by falling, to crack as a result of a shock (a round object). yahathoprou.

to gather one. kohep.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to put the hand as a visor to look into the distance (a habitual gesture of shamans). kekamai.

there the exit is closed. kiha yoka weeatayoa.

closed, obstructed (with logs, branches, etc.). weeo.

the great guatura has a muddy appearance. wii ke a pata mimou koshi.

to seem brave. fmimou puhi tikrohowe.

to seem, to appear. fmimou.

I dropped the machete. sipara ya huherema.

I let it fall. ya the huherema.

to drop, to let fall an object held in the hand. huhei.

snakes are toad eaters (of the yoyo species). oru yoyo warewe ke a.

honey seeker, you who pretend to be a shaman, listen then. oi porewe, horehore hekuramorewe a wãri yimika ta taiku.

the one who performs (the action indicated by the verbal root). warewe.

you will bathe immediately after getting water. mãu wa u hikeai tehe wa yarimou shoaope.

to do immediately, to do at the same time, to ventilate. yarimou.

to attack the enemies. shi karukai.

to attack enemies. karuku.

extend (a flexible thing), stretch a liana between two banks to cross a stream. frihiãmai.

It has a white line. Pei waiparapi uu.

white line. waiparapi.

to be folded or have been folded once, to be partially rolled up. wapurea.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

bee. abeja.

he knew immediately that he knew tobacco. "pee nahe tai yaia yaro", e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to determine immediately what it is about, to find a solution quickly, to guess immediately what it is about. katitiprao.

tomorrow we will descend from the mountain and ambush at the edge of the path. henaha pemaki re yohooparekiriowei, pema yo nohi thaprai shoaope.

we will descend from the mountain and ambush at the edge of the path. yohooparekiriowei.

those in the surrounding position [he ithorokokei, perf. mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i: "ei re the wai kua waikia kupe": aquellos posición de cerco [he ithorokokei, perf. ; he ithoque (knowing the region)] knew that that stream of water was the last (they said): "this is the last (there is no other)". ; he ithoque (conociendo la región) sabían que esa corokoprao: quedarse un cierto momento en posirriente de agua era la última (dijeron): "ésta es ción de cerco.

knowing the region. ithoque.

they went fishing. yuri pe kããi mi huokema.

to go somewhere with a specific purpose. huokema.

don't think you'll be able to express yourself better after drinking the spicy drink. yãimoro wa u ha koani.

child. koani.

to see in dreams people who are far away, or to see distant places. kuramai.

do not gather in large numbers. pe mi shuããtihe.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuãi.

interested. makasi.

he approached and spoke in a low voice. a ha ikuikuni a wã wahato wayoma.

to approach, to get close. ikuikuni.

to go ahead in reco-. pomi.

The man went. ãtãri ãhi* teshi.

to go. ãhi*.

to have been painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. rakiramokei.

the people of Hukowe invited us. h ukowe theri peni pemareki nakai kuprehei.

Hukowe (a place name). ukowe.

(example sentence). pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

(example sentence). pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

to surround, to go around. ãyoyorán.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cacao plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma.

to take refuge. ruoma.

they arrived and gathered. e pe re shimoopareyorunowei.

they gathered. shimoopareyorunowei.

to collect the hallucinogenic substance (lit. fayukuma yoai.

hallucinogenic substance. fayukuma.

when they arrived, they piled up the hunted animals one after the other in front of Horonãmi. horonãmi re iha e pe yaro hirapraai yaimou re kupeherouwei.

it is said that the women have the habit of coming here to kill fish (in the south of the Orinoco). eyeha yuri ke a no wãri shepraai yaimopihe, suwe peni.

to come. shepraai.

interjection said while pulling down the lower eyelid and staring at someone (offensive). he! he!.

reddish, pale red. wãkewãke.

tree. Mahurea.

firewood. ãyoku.

tree (unidentified). turayema.

the place where we used to go to get plantains is near. ãthe ahetepraa kurarei.

he lives near here. shapono a ahetewe ha ke kei.

near, close. ãthe.

he peeled the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to peel, to remove the outer layer. roshiprou.

to cut the end of a long object (by sliding a tool back and forth or applying blows from top to bottom). tipuruai.

he was walking with his arms around the shoulders of the two women. suwe ke kipi ipihiaprarope hami a pakihiapraroma.

to walk with arms around each other. ipihiaprarope.

to experience itching all over. fshiki.

to have muscle contractions, to tremble. ãtiãtimou.

to draw/trace several transverse lines. yãprutamai.

I don't have the desire to go hunting, I don't have the desire to go far away. ya rami no hupimi, ya no prahapimi.

to not have the desire to go hunting, to not have the desire to go far away. prahapimi.

although I lack matches, I do not say: "I will work to get matches" (lit. ya ma horimou tehe, "pohoroye ya hiki no ohote ta thaa sho", ya kuu mai.

to have no intention of working to obtain something. pohoroye.

homes. hogares.

estar convencido. nohi mirãhãpou.

to be convinced. mirãhã.

I don't stop having itches. the pe shihiti puhi reamoimi.

to not give up. puhi reamo.

it is for you, it is yours. fahe.

disperse only upriver to look for it. ora u ha wamaki shiro ha kuomopotuni a ta taeihe.

disperse. kuomopotuni.

you, who pretend to be a shaman, listen then, honey seeker. oi porewe, horehore hekuramorewe a wãri yimika ta taiku.

a jealous person. e ke a.

to become rough, gritty, granular. erere.

generic term. yorã.

younger brother, that shaman standing there will rub the arrows, and you will become a good hunter again. prake ha a re u p r aopariyowei, pusi ei ke ki re kui, ke ki re hokokoapareiwei.

he will rub/massage the arrows. hokokoapareiwei.

it is here where the path marked by broken bushes leads. hei ke e yo wai krea he haa kure.

1. Perfect state of he haai, to have begun to protrude. 2. To lead into, to arrive at, to enter (a path that ends in another path, a stream of water that flows into another). he haa.

disheveled. porukuwe.

disheveled, unkempt. porukuwe.

don't tell me what others say and do. kamiye iha pe ã pakihatihe.

to be always talking about people, to tell what others say and do. pakihi.

to become viscous or sticky (durative 2). yãrekou.

to refer to an unknown woman (whose exact kinship is unknown). esposuwe.

they cut off the jaguar's head. ira ke he pata pahetiprai ha kuparuheni.

to cut, to chop off, to decapitate. paheti.

to have oneself painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakiramou.

to be a little short. fhorotoho.

to kill. shei.

force an aphrodisiac on a woman by squeezing the palm of the hand (in which the substance is) over her nose and mouth. ﬁyokasi ke-.

amontonen las hojas, ¡nosotros las esparciremos de nuevo. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

conservar esparcido, extendido. patheripou.

they have to gather leaves and also it can be The word 'hena' in Yanomami means 'leaf'. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe.

leaves. hena.

they will dream, they will have premonitions. pe wãri maharimope, pe wãri thapimope.

to dream, to have a premonitory dream. thapimomai.

retain my songs truly. ware ã ta yua totihitare she.

retain, assimilate (songs, ceremonial speech formulas). totihitare.

to unite two points to allow passage from one to the other; to build a footbridge to cross a stream. ihirã.

to remove leaves from the path with one. protihiwe.

come, we both will work in the conucos. hapo, peheki hikarimope.

to work in the conucos (agricultural plots). hikarimope.

it's no use for me to get as close as possible to the vicinity. nada vale que me acerque lo más posible al lua.

vicinity, neighborhood. lua.

to miss a shot. posi waa.

to miss, to err. waa.

(a) Yanomami siroromini. siroromini yãnomãmi.

a mythical being, a kind of forest demon. siroromini.

it began to rain heavily. yetu maa ke pe horã pata re petarurei.

it began to rain. petarurei.

if the people of the vicinity enter into war against me, for that reason I will flee. nãro ke a ahetamai yaio tehe, nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha, e the eka he kahukema.

we stopped in the vicinity. ahetetamakei.

to fill the bottom of. paweai.

the fish jump out of the water one after the other, they jump out of the water. yuri ke ki he ruhupraai, pe ki he ruhou totihio.

to jump out of the water (a fish). ruhuo.

to clean or polish (multiple objects) completely. shutukaherarei.

(they two) shook a fruitless branch. proke ke the hiki ripukupiatarama.

(they two) shook a fruitless branch. ripukupiatarama.

The wind rose, shook the leaves, and branches fell, it was a storm. kihami watori re a hokeprou re kutheiwei, kihami yãã ke henaki raekaihe, hii ke hi poko prariroma.

branches fell. raekaihe.

you will make love many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already made love. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

you will make love many times. wamotipe.

having been unraveled, untwisted, or frayed (plural objects). kushesherariyo.

Cha. Cha. , alcoholic beverage of the hekura (lit. , brebaje alcohólico de los hekura (lit. : the beverage of the yawari). : el brebaje de los yawari).

a type of alcoholic beverage. yawari.

to touch, to feel. fupa.

to grab (a person once) with all one. huweherei.

to take the word to defend someone during a dispute. nowã huai.

to take the word to defend someone during a dispute. nowã hu.

to fabricate an oblong object. torohamai.

airplane. apiomi.

airplane. apiomi.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks (and abandon the camp) while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe (mit.

to push away, reject with the hands (once); to reject an evil being, keep it at a distance. hirurama.

to start to open (a fruit). hihathoprai: ponerse a.

to open in two (the shell of a fruit). hihathoprou.

to shed skin (snake), to molt (person). ukukou.

to loosen, to become loose, to tie a loose knot. prohororo.

to partially split the end of a long object to make it forked. pakarakei.

to lean sideways (a person). kaitou.

when the belly of the woman exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

object long cut in several pieces. tipura.

to hang cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry. shinari uku rukeke.

to be better for a moment. manahetou.

as the body (of Woodpecker) had begun to swell, the platform on which it was exposed swelled. a ha shuwerini hii hiki noshi hariraama.

platform on which a dead body is exposed before cremation. shuwerini.

the hekura smiled. hekura ke pe kasi watetoma.

they smiled. watetoma.

wait for someone at their house. no tapei.

to wait for someone at their house, to leave or abandon someone/something at home. tapei.

la nutria acostumbraba a refugiarse (= desaparecer) en un huequito. wãisikiripi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuoprou yaioma.

huequito. mohotuoprou.

plantain plant; Musa paradisiaca (Musaceae). terekerimi si.

plantain. terekerimi.

they are the only ones who frequently eat tapir. shama the pe iyai ayao heparoai.

to be the only one in a given situation, to do something alone or separately. paroai.

to cry, weep. miãpou.

es tan hermoso el rostro de mi hija. shetemi a puhi riyeheo totihio tharea.

beautiful. riyeheo.

to be happy. mamoheremi.

what am I going to say then when I participate in the nocturnal ceremonial dialogue. weti naha ke a wãri kuu puhio yaro, wa the ã rãmai ta ke.

to participate in the wayamou, to sing to the hekura during the night, to sing at night (bird). rãrayou.

to harvest tobacco leaves. yeri.

to tear or cut lengthwise, to cut a strip from the edge of something. sheriri.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisiprou.

smell, sniff, snoop. ãkuku.

carry me on your back, I am seriously injured. yare ta yehireheriyo ya wãri waikou totihio ke a kuhe.

to be very sick, to be seriously injured. waikou.

I have the intention to give an arched bow (during the wayamou ceremony). tisho ya hi niya ha.

to hang in an arched shape, to hang loosely like a hammock. tishako-.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the water surface, behind the clouds (celestial body). ururu.

to splash once. hamish-ai.

no, no hablen así, ustedes mujeres, dejen de tratarnos de cobardes. maa, e naha pe kutihehe, suwe pe, yamare kiriaprai he prakehotihehe.

to shame, to embarrass. kirihiprai.

it is said when many bunches of pijiguao are ripe. yakrihiwe.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to disseminate, to space out. shororoprou.

to go around one after the other. hãropraai.

to have the habit of being found near a certain place at a certain time of day. aheoprou.

throw me the loincloth. wayuko ta sheyepa.

he threw the small bird to the woman. suwe ke iha hãshimo a sheyekema.

to sow by throwing seeds, to throw an object to someone, to violently throw an object to break it. sheyeai.

to begin to descend (twilight, at the moment when the sun disappears on the horizon). weyahaai.

now that you have expelled the evil caused by the plant from his body, he will wake up healthy tomorrow. wa henaki re wayu hoyarihe, henaha totihitawe ke a hokeprariyo (cha.

the gallineta flew away. hãshimo a hokeprariyoma.

to get up, wake up; to get back up when on the ground; to fly away (a bird); to manifest suddenly, to declare; to be expelled (a pathogenic being or substance, out of a sick person. hokeprou.

he/she has wrinkled buttocks (offensive in front of the person). a koroku wãikiwe.

wrinkled, dented (in several parts or over the entire surface). wãikiprawe.

not to fear receiving blows, to confront an adversary, to present oneself after a threat to defy the one who made it. pramokei.

to be animated by a regular and repetitive movement, to undulate, to produce waves. kuaai.

pointed extremity of an arrow shaft (lit. . hayu.

that is the reason why I do not want to be dead. yaro kahiki re keonowei the yãno pe si ahi nikerei.

to be. ahi.

(speech from upriver). wããwãã.

(funny): to place the feet pointing towards the fire to warm them. fmamisiki yehitao (gracioso).

to place the feet pointing towards the fire to warm them. yehitao.

he inhales a hallucinogenic drug and attacks/kills his enemy's spiritual force (pei no uhutipi). epena wa re ukukuãrãreiwei, a no uhutipi wãri ta sheri.

to inhale a hallucinogenic drug and attack/kill someone. ukukuãrãreiwei.

to cease and resume repeatedly (noise), to turn on and off repeatedly (motor). waiwaimou.

go sit over there. a ta roikutu.

go sit over there. roikutu.

rock cock bird. ehoãmi una.

rock cock. ehoãmi.

the old man that I killed in the war. fipa ya si re turekeaprai.

to tie a monkey. keaprai.

after a long time, her legs became short and crooked, she came out painfully and arrived home. yãkumi the mamiki yerea ha totihiarini, yãkumi re a ha harini a kopema.

to brood, to incubate. yerea.

to groan. frãã.

to fabricate an object with walls too high. mi wapoko.

to clean, to polish (an object). shutukaheai.

to become concave on the outside, to hollow out a gourd to make a container. wapoko.

tree. árbol.

following Woman-palm the songs come this way. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

Woman-palm. Mujer-palma.

to help someone, to help someone during work or combat; to accompany, to help a sick person, a child, an elderly person. payerimai.

speech from upriver. pakatapi.

Prueheyoma (them) cursed them immediately. prueheyoma a hirai shoaoma.

1. The hallucinogenic substance itself. 2. To scold, argue, curse.. hirai.

all the others hated us. komi the peni yamareki nohi wãripoma.

to feel resentment towards someone. wãripoma.

the arrow got stuck in a branch and they asked him to go get it. shereka a ha shatiikuni a nosiyemamahe: "a ta thaprari", e pe kuma.

to ask a favor (for someone else). shatiikuni.

I slipped in the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

I said to myself: "while they roll down here, I will kill them". "eyeha ke pe wãri kahehou tehe ya pe waikai totihiowe", ya ha kuni.

to slide, slip, tumble down a slope. kahehe.

to cause to be twisted locally, to cause to be twisted only at one point. torokamai.

using their fingers, they painted themselves quickly around the eyes with the brains of Rabipelado. nãro heyoshi pe re kui, pei mamo kasiki hami heyoshi pe wai hãhihãhitaakema.

they painted themselves quickly around the eyes with the brains of Rabipelado. hãhihãhitaakema.

the hairs of the atayu caterpillar. atayu niosiki.

1. Scales of fish. 2. Hairs of caterpillar.. niosiki.

hurry up, throw yourselves into the water. pe ta keo haioparu.

to throw oneself into the water, to jump into the water. haioparu.

to have the smell of rotting flesh or fish; to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. thopoko.

to blow a substance through a tube made from the cucurito fruit bone in order to make someone inhale hallucinogens. fkareshi mo horai.

to blow a substance through a tube made from the cucurito fruit bone in order to make someone inhale hallucinogens. fkareshi.

the cambur compote is becoming completely homogenized. tate uku si uhutitiai.

to become soft or smooth to the touch; to become homogenized, without solid particles or grains (liquid, powder). uhutitiai.

monkey. hoashiri.

why do you leave the wapu fruits soaking for so long. weti the ha wapu wa ki kãpotii.

to leave in water to soak or macerate. kãpotii.

to make something medium-sized or rather large (in relation to the usual size of the object in question). prowehekei.

I am convinced that there is really no rahara monster. rahara ke ki no wãri kuopimi ma re totihii.

not to exist, not to be (in a certain place). kuopimi.

ellos son poco numerosos. pe kutaa.

Poco numeroso, en pequeña cantidad. kutaa.

mi tharia: to not be well aligned (elongated objects stuck in the ground). mi tharia: no estar bien alineados (objetos alargados clavados en el suelo).

aligned. alineados.

while coming down to meet us, the fire in the chest of the demon Omãyãri ignited. omãyãrithawe ke pariki wake homoprou mi ha paoni, kama re pe ithoprou re tehe (cha.

a demon. Omãyãri.

before leaving, they arranged a row of palm leaves stuck in the ground. pe the pe humapi reprou tehe, wãima henaki re ithãkeiwehei.

they arranged a row of palm leaves stuck in the ground. ithãkeiwehei.

to crawl or be crawling on the ground. shaio.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood erect, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

where rocks stand erect close together. shirikiope.

en los ojos, allí donde treparon los gusanos, pululan termitas. ereerema re kona shipe rãirãiprarou.

pulular. rãirãiprarou.

in all the points of the trees. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to rub against, to clean, to wipe, to erase by rubbing with the hand or a pointed object; to dirty or stain an object by rubbing or applying another. hãhiãi.

don't laugh at me. yare noka ikãi mai.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãm a.

did they not kill one of mine. fyare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to laugh mockingly, to mock someone by laughing. ikãrãyou.

palm (unidentified plant). shitipa.

Shamans are hekura and, with rare exceptions, are initiated and male. Los chamanes son hekura y, salvo raras excepciones, son iniciados y de sexo masculino.

hekura re pe kooprou ma hititio tehe, omawe ihirupini ware nohi thapou hea tahiyaa kupe (cha. hekura re pe kooprou ma hititio tehe, omawe ihirupini ware nohi thapou hea tahiyaa kupe (cha. ): although all the hekura had abandoned me, Õmawe's son was the only one who stayed to take care of me. ): aunque todos los hekura me habían abandonado, el hijo de Õmawe fue el único que se quedó para cuidar de mí.

shamans. hekura.

to become fluid, to fluidify. hereshiai.

to be slightly open towards the exterior. uhehea.

to wilt. ajarse.

1. To cook directly over the fire (without hanging it). 2. To replace a shoot in its place after having extracted the roots or tubers (ocumo or cassava). tirerai.

1. Kinship term, 3rd person. niyoãi.

the woman Shapo konayoma hurries to come towards you. shapo konayoma a noshi re hariraaimi ye.

she hurries to come towards you. hariraaimi.

brother-in-law, don't make me unhappy, break off a little of your yopo snuff for me. shoriwe, yare no preaamatihe, the wai tiiprai mi hetua ta shoaroni.

to receive something that has been broken off or detached with the fingers. tiipei.

we must forget and stop seeing each other, you stay where you are (= don't come to our house). y afeki mohoti hoyayou fa kuikuni, efa kafe a wãri roa ta fe iku.

to stop visiting each other. hoyayou.

they are passing through great scarcity. pe the pe rii no wãrowe ohei totihia.

to begin to have desire. ohei.

hunt animals (= go hunting). yaro pe ta niyahe.

to hunt animals, to go hunting. niyahe.

you all see, the night demon passes again, since he does not walk fast and I am speaking, give me a gift at dawn. pe haikia : todos vean, el demonio de la noche pasa nuevamente, como él no anda rápido y yo estoy hablando, háganme un regalo de madrugada.

to be all present in a dwelling or camp. koope.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahamai.

kinship term. thathepi.

now I no longer have a desire to give away my possessions. hei tehe kamiyeni ya matohipi no hipeapimi totihiwe.

to have a desire to give away one. hipeapimi.

to make something crumble or collapse completely. hishishiprou.

collapsed (plural objects). hashishirariyo.

that is exchanged for beads, a long and well-loaded necklace of beads is needed to be able to get a cotton hammock. tope ke p pehi, pe tope shiko re totihii ha, ihi yii re pe pehi.

to make dense, thick or crowded (locally). shikoã.

to grow hair again in the place of the tonsure. yoothai.

in the past the Yanomami did not have plants of the 'low' species of cambur. hapa yãnomãmi peni yahatotorimi pe thaponomi.

plants of the . thaponomi.

when the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to deform, harden, twist, wrinkle. tosheshe.

to lie down or be lying down. makeo.

feed them (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). ke ki ni ta hikãhe.

feed (a very small child by chewing food and giving it mouth-to-mouth); feed (jokingly, during a ceremonial speech). hikãhe.

they gathered perhaps a package of magic substances. heri pe hãro norãmi hokeremahe.

Horonami blew (the deadly substance), and he fell immediately. horonami a horaprai tehe a kea shoa yoma.

magic substance. horeprema.

I offer many objects. pruka ya mavohipi tikreai.

to offer many objects (during a commercial transaction). ikre.

in the place where I have the habit of going to fetch water. mãu ya u re yakepraaiwei hami.

to have the habit of going to fetch water at a certain place. yakepraaiwei.

allomorph of prapariyo in the presence of derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning. prapariyo.

the váquiros set out to advance very quickly and Pájaro váquiro was advancing along with them. ware ke ki ropaaprarou shoaoheri, aheanariwe a wãri rerea poaaprarou ha kuparuni (mit.

they were advancing very quickly. poaaprarou.

to make love. wamo.

the maize began to grow in a vast area. yono mo haa aka praukua re shoarayoheriiwei.

I will go away. ya no mraa shoarayoherii.

to begin, to start. shoarayoherii.

they were damaged/deteriorated/ruined (perfective, plural subject). wãritirariyoma.

dawn came gradually and they claimed goods (= proceeded to trade). the mi ha harutaaruni, matohi pe ã pou henaomahe.

dawn gradually. harutaaruni.

the voice of the ancestor came out from the depths of the den (saying): "Come get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni.

at a distance. paru.

to be always running, to run several times in a row. rereoprou.

they have lost them all one after the other, and I have had nothing for some time. the pe ha hoyaakiheni ke ya horipraa kure.

lost. hoyaakiheni.

to thicken, to become more concentrated. rue.

the wasp nest whose (tubular) opening is curved. kopina moroshi re payokoi.

curved, hooked, having the shape of an arc. kuyahi.

(related form). uhehe.

fish, payara; Hydrolicus spp.: H. armatus, H. tatauaia, H. wallacei (Cynodontidae). Its flesh is mediocre and full of bones; it is a fish that draws attention for its very long and sharp predatory teeth.. payara.

our. waroo.

to offer food (to many people in succession). hipemokei.

suddenly he squeezed the beehive and transformed into a beehive. oi ke a ha the ha haporo- harahara taparuhuruni, a oiprariyoma.

to squeeze, press between arms. haporo.

to have a changing voice (adolescent); to have a hoarse voice (from shouting too much or after participating in a ceremonial dialogue). wã peherã.

changing (voice). peherã.

you will weave an open-weave basket or mapire and we will paint ourselves (imprinting the hexagonal pattern of the mapire on the skin). yoroﬁ ke wa tiyepe, pefeki onimope.

to paint oneself, to be painted. onimope.

he made the tortoise slide from above to below (and said): "bite my chin. fwatori ke a yohotamai piyeama: "pei, ware werina ta re ki mãyo taei huewetipari".

to slide something from above to below. huewetipari.

shoporopi. shoporãmãpi.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. fniya hupamou maorewe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. maore.

He is not moving at all, maybe I killed him. a wãri ãtiãmi, pe wãri waikoma tao.

to be motionless, not to move. ãti.

brother-in-law, did you and I already eat the wapu fruits that we prepared. shori, wapu pehe ki re thaperei, wa ki waa waikirema.

we two (you and I) prepared. thaperei.

to diminish, become smaller, narrow. sipiprou.

the Female-toucan with the pubis pululant with lice. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

Female spirit associated with the toucan. mayepiriyom.

(antonym of insisting). kuye.

I arrived after they were peeling the guama pods and I sat down. ya waro ha hetaikuni, krepo u pe wãri washeaihe tehe ya rokema.

to peel green plantains using nails and teeth. uminosa.

fish (unidentified). tootoomi.

to remain for a long time in the last position (while walking in a group through the forest). shiokatao.

let's (the two of us) burn the bee nest. kopina ke yahe hisikai.

bee nest. kopina.

to split in two. pahathoprai.

to be angry. teekere.

cut sticks and use them as levers to drag it along the ground (in this phrase yaro refers to a human being). hii wama hi ha perarini, yaro a hore hamorimai ta poohe she.

use as a lever. hamorimai.

high, elevated. rapa.

I rub the wapu fruits against the bottom of a basket. wapu ya ki hipii.

to rub toxic cooked fruits against the wall of a basket (s h o t e), after having soaked them for some time. hipii.

pónganse rápidamente a correr (cada uno por su lado). pe ta rereo shoaomopotu.

to disperse rapidly. -omopotayo-.

outside, the community of termites put white down on their hair. sipo hami osheri pe he horoimoma.

the community/people of termites that put white down on their hair. horoimoma.

we jumped into the water and swam. kopou.

falling into water, jumping into water. kopou.

they went to the aforementioned place in search of pijiguao palms. ihami rasha si pe taeaprama.

they went to the aforementioned place in search of pijiguao palms. taeaprama.

yes, that's what has to be done. aye minahami.

that. minahami.

the fragrant bark of the mãrã tree is suspended in the lobes of our ears. yamaki yimikaki no mãrãpi sina ni re huuhope ye (cha.

fragrant bark. huuhope.

Mirewakariwe shot a poisoned dart at the eye of the tragavenado. mirewakariweni hokoto keki mamo horapema.

Blowing, he shot (the deadly substance) at the wing joint of Titiri. titiri pei yoohoapiki hami the horakema.

to blow a malefic substance at someone, to shoot a poisoned dart at someone. horapema.

to be locally cracked or cracked open. thepaha.

it is said that they were accompanied back by the people of Shashanawe. shashanawe theri peni pe ãhã peratayomahe.

a place name. Shashanawe.

to have those wavy lines traced on one. hukekamokei.

to turn over an eyelid. mamo kasi yoreo.

to turn over an eyelid (by playing). yoreo.

plant or animal taxonomy. turumi.

we will widen the hole. yama theka premape.

to make large, to fabricate large an object; to enlarge, to widen (a cavity). premape.

he is in the forest. urihi hami a kua.

he is over there. kiha a kuatayoa.

to be, to exist. kua.

we stood for a long time and night fell. yamaki upratao tehe, the mi ka komãi.

to remain standing for a long time; to be standing for a long time. upratao.

Yoreriyoma (= Woman-mushroom) mourned her son and cried. yoreriyoma pe ihirupi a nomiã poma.

Who are you crying for. weti ke wa the nomiã pou.

to mourn, to cry for. nomiã.

dusty, covered in dust. hekãhekãpi.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another tribe (said of a man mixing with men or women from his own or other communities). ishipashiki.

to cut transversely in two an elongated object; to paint or draw a line across an elongated object. hahetiprai.

there many váquiros (a type of fish) gather. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

1. To fill up to the brim. 2. To become numerous (living beings). manikiai.

black light. ishi puhi ehepi.

light, pale. ikihi.

honey, slightly sour, of the hãshã ãshi na bee. hãsha.

the little one suckled (from his mother's breast). ihiru ke a wai hesi hoturoma.

to suckle (a baby). hoturoma.

to tie, to bind, to fasten with a very tight knot or loop. prohohoamai.

red hummingbird (unidentified). tohomamoriw.

to start frying, roasting, or toasting. hãrikiprai.

como los esperaba silbó para llamarlos. pe no ha taikuni, pe husi heãmorayoma.

to whistle. horomi.

what is that. hei weti.

who are you then. weti pei wa ta thawe.

what fruits are those. weti pei ke the ki.

this/that, what. weti.

I met them (in the sky, in the land of souls). ya kuo nareopeherayou kuhe.

in a different place from the one stated. vhvrayo.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to pull, to tear off. huwereni.

I'm not going to the forest, I'm not leaving the communal dwelling (to live elsewhere). urihi hami ya huimi, ya kasiproimi.

to go live somewhere else, to leave the communal dwelling to live elsewhere. kasipraru.

sin. kake.

food whose juice or pulp can be consumed by biting and aspirating. watetamou.

1. yahi therimi: 1. Members of the community to which one belongs; neighbors, members of neighboring communities (often related), with whom a person maintains a close relationship. Miembros de la comunidad a la cual uno pertenece; vecinos, miembros de comunidades vecinas (a menudo emparentados), con los cuales una persona mantiene una relación asidua.

members of the community, neighbors. yahi therimi.

to paint dots on someone. tipikai.

sostienen el techo de la casa de los antepasados. the ki rahakapi makekeprarou yaioma.

house. yaioma.

I have a fish bone stuck in my throat. ya the hããrema.

to have a fish bone stuck in the throat. hããrema.

for fun, to tap a termite nest with the hand so that they fall on someone's head and bite them. he yoothopei.

to tap or flick with the fingers to remove dirt or insects. yoothoai.

put on the head. yarikoa.

resist the penetration of a pointed object, particularly an arrow. toukuprou.

I stretch the skin to let it dry. ira ya si mi hithoreprai.

stretch a skin to let it dry. hithoreprai.

to bend/curve the tip of an object (perfective, plural object). toyekerariyo.

to call someone father-in-law, to be in the relationship of son-in-law to father-in-law. shoapemou.

the woman was sitting on the sand. mrakatahu a kuope ha suwe a tirereoma.

was sitting on the ground. tirereoma.

(no clear translation provided). rai thotho.

airplane. apiomi.

airplane. apiomi.

I fold the loincloth in two. wayuko ya ki shãkoprai.

to fold in two. shãkokei.

A flashlight is an electric lamp. Reitena si linterna, lámpara eléctrica.

flashlight. reitena.

to wrinkle the forehead. huko siki riikio.

to wrinkle the forehead. riikio.

he renounced, went away angry, and upon arriving put the package of fish to cook on the embers. a hushuoripi kãi ha tirapariherini, yuri e hãro yapaharoma.

desisted, gave up, renounced. tirapariherini.

to stretch by twisting the torso while keeping one arm bent behind the neck. ãkrotãi.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks (and abandon the camp) while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe (mit.

to push away, reject with the hands (once); to reject an evil being, keep it at a distance. hirurama.

to become shiny, to become iridescent (terminative aspect). terereprou.

plant or animal taxonomic system. sunukama.

Let's go to Mount Maiyo. Maiyo keki hami e.

Let. Maiyo!.

he obstructed the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

to start obstructing an orifice or closing an opening. kahuprai.

shamans. kekura.

to strengthen, to make firm (durative, plural object). rohothomai.

the noise is barely heard. the hoã manashiwe.

noise, sound, voice. manashiwe.

Õmawe sat with his back turned near there. omawe ke e roa ha payekeikuni e humapi reoma.

to sit with one. payekeikuni.

he picked up kakuruma stones and threw them at Woman-Picure. kakuruma a ha hoketarini, thomiyoma a sheyeprarema.

to hit a person by throwing objects at them. sheyeprai.

cuando ustedes limpien la parte del conuco invadida por la maleza, las espinas de la planta kãmoãrima los rasguñarán y chorrearán sangre. wamaki yasikope hami kãmoãrima peni wamaki i yepe rukekotii kukei.

part of a conuco (cultivated plot) that has been cleared of weeds. yasikope.

they (the hekura) have red cotton on their legs. pe mathaki matoyapi.

leg. matha.

as he was blind, they transported him in his hammock. a huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki ha.

blind. huperipi.

to receive several banana shoots separated from the mother plant. tikareapei.

fish. cha-.

to do this (stirring a liquid with a stick to remove something cooking) repeatedly. yakoretaai.

to return to the communal house one after another, generally after activities carried out in the forest or in the garden plot. shaponopraai.

the son-in-law went ahead first and his father-in-law followed him. pe hekamapi e re pariprariyonowei, pe shii e re nohãã shoakenowei.

the son-in-law went ahead first. pariprariyonowei.

to proclaim one's hunger for meat, to affirm one's cannibalistic desire. fnaiki himou.

to have an insatiable hunger for meat. fnaiki oweheproimi [+ neg.

hunger for meat; cannibalistic desire. fnaiki.

to hurt one's foot with a sharp object. fmamiki hiio.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to have a foot that resists penetration by a sharp object. fmamiki toukuprou.

foot. fmamiki.

he ate it all and returned home in a state of homicide and satiated. a waa ha haikirini a unokai ha kopoherini, petiri (mit.

in a state of homicide. haikirini.

to be directed towards the ground, to hang, to sink, to lean towards. wereai.

to shout while chasing. houhoumo.

adolescent human. mãrãnãpi.

to be completely wrinkled or crumpled. ãpretewe.

to be wrinkled or crumpled. wãihihi.

Carpintero verdoso (a type of bird). iriweni.

to fire a shotgun shot (neologism). thoomou.

to breathe on the surface of the water (a fish). koãriyo.

we ate the birds first, then they put the guabinas to roast on the fire. yoo pesi yama pe waa ha shomarini, kuma ma pe hãro yaprai piyeahe.

to do first, to do apart. shoma-.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small stakes planted around it). here ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, dwelling or camp by erecting a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or stakes planted in the ground). ithorokop.

the Waika had gone to war (and someone said): "Paint your faces black. waika pe wayu ha aruherini: "pe mi ta hiriko sho. ". ".

to smear one. hirikou.

gluttonous, voracious. wausi.

to eat someone completely. hubiepoakei.

to have a slightly reddish color, to have reddish reflections (locally). wahehai.

to mix with people from another community in a lasting way. pashoko.

a mosquito has bitten me. ukushini yare hiirema.

to harden locally. hihukei.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pe re koyokaiwei, ya pe nowã thaa shoarei kurei.

people from another community. koyokai.

during the ritual of a girl's first menstruation. unokãimou.

ritual of a girl. unokãi.

I slipped on the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

to slide, to slip, to precipitate down a slope. kahe.

a beast usually lies in ambush here, there is a beast lying in ambush. yaro a yetekou re ahetoimi, yaro a re yetekopi yei.

we left the palm grove behind and then lay in ambush again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to ambush, to lie in wait. fyeteke.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

1. to curl up (animal, dog) 2. to arrange several objects in a circular shape, to arrange leaves around the edge of a basket 3. to be arranged in a circular manner, to form an arc. watho.

1. To become weak. 2.. yauaai.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. resheshewe.

before leaving, they arranged a row of palm leaves stuck in the ground. pe the pe humapi reprou tehe, wãima henaki re ithãkeiwehei.

to plant, to insert vertically into the ground, to offer (a basket of food), to descend (from a hammock). ithãkei.

they believed it was the roar of a jaguar and were afraid to go outside, to the forest. ira ke a wã re puhimaiwei, urihi hami, sipo hami, pe huu kiri shoaoma.

the forest; the jungle. puhimaiwei.

make cross, let cross, tell someone to cross. pekatuamai.

he was the only one there who had remained living in the collective house. iha re a hakokoa hea shoaa ma re kure.

to have been cut into pieces. hakokoa.

ritual of isolation and purification performed by women having their first period (and their husbands); ritual state of those who have committed or participated in a homicide. unokai mou.

to perform the ritual of isolation and purification. unokai mou.

I drank the water quickly, it was hot (= warm, referring to river water). mãu u ya u kotarema, u yopraoma.

to be hot, to have heat. yopraoma.

they went to shoot arrows at the vultures. watupa re ke ki niyãi mi re ukukeiwei.

to go and shoot arrows at something. ukukeiwei.

to wrinkle, to wilt. haa.

to start drying or smoking (something) over a fire. tetekeprai.

measure out the same amount of tobacco for each one. pee nahe wa ha owerarini.

measure, count (several quantities). owerarini.

I pulverize it. ya e pe ha kopeaprani.

to pulverize it. kopeaprani.

ant. ninihipe.

extend your hands (so that I can give you something). imiki ta poshokoiku.

two cupped hands to receive something. poshokoiku.

to be numb, to have a numb limb. potete.

when you throw the disease demons (no wãri) at humans, they converge on them (to contaminate them). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

converge, direct towards the same direction; give many gifts to the same person. pruka.

we will come to visit. yamaki yahiiwe.

to make a short visit to a neighboring group, without staying overnight in their house. yahii.

to cause to move, to set to work, to produce waves or undulations. kiãmarei.

to be heard for a moment (noise). yaweretou.

to feel quite well. puhi totihitatou.

to feel well (physically or mentally); to rejoice. totihitou.

to crush and grind with the fingers. tihu.

they were not upset, they did not fight, they were well. pe hushuonomi, pe hiranomi, the pe topratioma.

they were well. topratioma.

the otter had curled up in a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã waikirayoherima.

to be curled up in a compact mass; to be far ahead (in the lead). waikirayoherima.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have thrown anything at you, they would have limited themselves to shooting you with poisoned darts (with a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to launch malefic substances by blowing through a blowgun. prothomou.

(myth) Oso hormiguero fell asleep with his head thrown back on an old reddish tree trunk. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

1. To become slightly reddish. 2. To cause red spots to appear on the skin (sun). 3. To be reddish.. si teãyã.

I provoked the return of the hekura. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

to provoke the return, to oblige to retrace one. tatomai.

to lie down one next to another, one behind the other. hohãthãpraai.

whitish and soft stone like chalk used to sharpen burins. mãrohãshi.

spotted antbird; Thamnophilus punctatus (Formicariidae). karihirima.

I took the bow without the string and walked leaning on it. hãto mãroko ya nahi re tereiwei, ya paihou kuaaherima.

to lean on, support oneself with a stick or bow while walking; to prop up, support. paihi.

bejuco masimasi. rihu masi.

with those bambués inkema, clinados haré puntas de ﬂecha e inﬂigiré heridas. pe ihirupi a suhaaiyepe ka ha tharini.

él les destrosentó los lomos a todos los niños. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

to finish, to complete, to grab, to take everything, to eat everything, to give everything. haikai.

to cover an object or hide it behind something to prevent theft. shãhotakei.

to get tangled up frequently while speaking. hãrehewe.

who has inclined the palm spade where my kashuhuri seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yotehekei.

en cada ocasión, él hacía como que iba a subir, pero (en seguida) renunciaba. the wãri tuo kuyeapraroma.

to renounce, to give up. -taai.

to have lost one. oyepiprou.

to finish producing pots. turereprou.

to become thin, to lose weight. rasisou.

to be dry and hard (perfective aspect). yihitirayou.

hang your hammock above this one. hetupei.

to hang one. hetupei.

a mosquito stung me. ukushini yare tikarema.

mosquito. ukushini.

those big-mouthed fish that move shaking their tails, I will fish them and give them to the Waika to eat. hei nape mãrohã ki re yaraape, ya ha yokeprarini, waika riha ya e wamai ta yaio.

shake the tail (of fish that move). yaraape.

had malaria. hurapirayou.

to be completely folded, wrinkled or crumpled. wãikiwe.

are you going to decide to probe the armadillo's burrow. wamaki re tuo waikiwe, wamaki hipai re waikipohori.

to probe. hipi.

jaguar, hombre valeroso (diálogo ceremonial) (lit. fmihi a pata re nosiyemoyahi.

to growl. nosiyemo.

to be indecisive, to hesitate; to wonder what to do. nahamomai.

bruscamente, él puso la mano sobre las hojas inclinadas. enaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to put one. iprushi.

Siroromi desolló al hombre que chillaba en vano de dolor. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to whine insistently (a child). miyomo.

to become short, to shorten something. homoto.

to have emptied the insides of an intestine by sliding it between the fingers. pirarei.

harpoon arrowhead. ãtãri ãhi teshi.

as I am a Waika, that tree standing there, I will split it open. waika ya kutaeni, hei hi re uprayahi, hi niya ha yakaroprani.

I will split it open. yakaroprani.

limpiarse la nariz con la uña. fhiyokaki titheo.

perro muerto que pertenecía al hablante. fipa hiyoka.

nose. ﬁyoka.

jaguar, hombre valeroso (diálogo ceremonial) (lit. fmihi a pata re nosiyemoyahi.

growls. nosiyemoyahi.

the nutria had curled up in a place where the high part of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to curl up, to be curled up at the bottom of something. hikoo.

to start to stink, to start to smell bad. hithãriãi.

null. shithora.

to flatten, to make flat. makeheai.

to cut into many pieces. weyuweyuyoma.

they are aligned (they are grouped in a row). the hirao wirinawe.

to be perched side by side (birds). wirinawe.

Hoo had eaten his brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

to eat/consume entirely. hooni.

I sew a garment. iro ya siki tuyei.

I weave an open-weave basket. yorehi ya si tuyei.

he made a straight open weave and turned it into a tail. koma, a teshina thakema (mit.

to unite elements together: to lash a tree or palm; to knock down the earth; to darn, to weave; to tie together with vines by blows of a machete or knife, to enlarge an opening in that way (a den, a beehive, etc.); to bite (a snake). tuyerarei.

He is determined to go. Niyoprou wake huu.

determined. niyoprou.

offer food after having received it oneself. kahiki no koo.

be silent. kahiki ta okãpãri (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

mouth. kahiki.

then I tensed the string of my bow. hãto ya nahitha si potehea shoamakema.

the string of a bow. shoamakema.

he/she let the cooking water evaporate. u wehetimapema.

to let the cooking water evaporate (through negligence). wehetimapei.

(birds) perching side by side. he wirinaai.

I group them putting them in a row. ya the hiraa wirinaai.

to be lined up side by side, to be perched side by side (birds). wirina.

to imitate (once) the cry of an animal to attract it. hãshãmiãi.

he introduced into it a dart. wãhã yuprou: hetukeiwei.

to introduce into it a dart. hetukeiwei.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with his molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

to crush partially with molars, to chew food in that way. washishi.

his liver fell to the ground, he lost his liver. pitha hami kama ke the amoku kea shoarayoma, kama amoku hoyarayoma.

to predict that an object will be lost. hoyarayou.

it was under the sand and, as it moved, it caused the surface to move. kihami mrakatahu re e hirehiremai kuaai shoaoheriiwei (mit.

to cause a disturbance on the surface (by moving underneath it). shoaoheriiwei.

to finish surpassing (in height). toreheprou.

to become twisted. kayareai.

to sprout vigorously (a plant). tiririai.

malefic supernatural being of the yai the class; it is a cannibal that lives in an ardent world in gestation, the tuku ke misi. mothokariwe.

to be cracked. hãthothowe.

to be cracked (perfective form). hãthothorayou.

to make love with legs tied. waku the ki rukeketai.

to make love. waku.

to play at covering oneself with mud. ãhiãmayorayou.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I thrust the point into the shaft and sat down by the fire. yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to approach one another to confront in combat. tisupani.

The river is wide. Pusi pei a wakepra.

river. pusi.

very large lizard (unidentified). ithoroko.

they shot arrows at him. a nini tharemahe.

to shoot arrows at someone. tharemahe.

as a heavy rain was approaching, Horonami took shelter. maa a hoã pata huimai ha, Horonami a wehemoma.

to come towards, to approach. huimai.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

the night demon was perched on a branch that was bent towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma (mit.

to bend, to curve, to twist. hithoreprou.

to constitute several dispersed groups of intermingled people. nikereprawe.

do you feel the effect of the hallucinogen. wamaki pea yairihawe.

do you feel the effect of the hallucinogen?. yairihawe?.

they are people of the Mahekoto community who did it, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to belong to the same community, to be of the same species, of the same class. shiroikuni.

to widen progressively towards the edge (in a conical or bell shape). ehete.

to mix, stir, agitate (perfective form). tikorerei.

to remain behind, to stay behind. hetaai.

when the fire throws out a lot of flame you will throw yourself into it (your flesh) it will crackle for a good while and (thus) you will become big and fat. pe wake pata parao totihio tehe wa re niyaprapeiwei, iha wa yoriyorimotima, wa prerayou.

to become viscous, pasty, deformed due to the action of heat; to crackle. oriyorimou.

to get dirty easily or continuously. shamitou.

cacique bird (yellow-backed or red-backed). frãrewei.

to occur suddenly. yohoprakei.

ellos vinieron a defenderlo, si no, el jaguar hubiera acabado arrancándole los ojos. the pe nohi peyerema ha tharei irani the mamo no hokea he yatiroyopi ha.

arrancándole los ojos. yatiroyopi.

to cause to submerge completely. paotamakei.

you will transport the blood in the pot (making several round trips). hapoka si ha wa kore pe teaprarei.

you will transport (something) in the pot (making several round trips). teaprarei.

to get goosebumps. umokoyoripiai.

to hang down and dangle at a low height (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). tirororayou.

he had the intention to participate in a war expedition, that's why he returned home. ya niya ha wayu funi ya koo kuprerei.

to participate in a war expedition. kuprerei.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. yao ãki.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. yao.

Jaguar se puso lentamente de cuclillas. irariwe ke a ha roaruni.

Jaguar se soltó y cayó. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni, a kea shoarayoma.

Jaguar no lograba ya abrazar el tronco del árbol y se desesperó. irariwe ke pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma.

el demonio (que tumba a la gente dándole puntapiés) justo acababa de terminar un andamiaje alrededor de un enorme algarrobo, cuando llegó Jaguar. kãrãnãri ãro kohi pata yotoharimai tutoonowei ha, irariwe ke a pata waroo ha heparuni.

Jaguar (a mythological ancestor). irariwe.

to be hidden. hithethe.

to become numerous. thethe.

give my younger brother some fish, whom we asked to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

give my little brother a share, whom we asked to accompany us. oãsiwe pema a re nokamapore, a ta topehe.

to ask someone to keep something or someone in a certain position. nokamapore.

Brazil nut trees. kohoki.

the night began just to unfold. the mi titi noshi ma hariraai ma peoherii tehe.

to unfold, to spread out. peoherii.

to pass from one slope to another. kopatama.

cuando los brazos de Jaguar resultaron demasiado cortos como para abrazar el tronco del árbol (que se dilataba), enloqueció. iwariwe ke a pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma.

enloqueció. horihoma.

the Spider Spirit crouched in its transparent hammock (asks): "What are you doing. yiipi pata wararawe kuwe ha hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri ha puushitaoni.

spider web. puushitaoni.

I must be sleepy, I'm yawning all the time. ya nami maharishi ya kahiki shiro rereo.

the son of Jaguar fell asleep immediately, with his mouth open. ira pe ihirupi miã kãi kahiki rerea shoapariyoma.

to open the mouth; to yawn. rereai.

there, on the summit of the mountain I abandoned a deer. mihi, matotopiyei ha preãri ya prapei kuhe.

on the summit, on the ridge of a mountain. totopiyei.

1) to reach the last part of a journey; 2) to cross, to cut transversely; to draw intersecting lines. yahetiai.

we walked downstream and they began to recognize (the place). yamaki mi ha wereikuni, the no wãisipi ihipirema.

to recognize. wereikuni.

tree. uﬁ.

1. to roll up, to wrap around something; 2. to tie, to wrap, to make a package by wrapping a tie around; 3. a package tied in that manner, wrapped, rolled up on itself, coiled. yãthori.

he put the dead children at the bottom (of the carrying basket), and sat the living one on top. ihi-koikoimi ru nomawe ke the pe ha kohomakini heaka ha temi Zool.

to put down, to put at the bottom. kohomoãkei.

the demon (that knocks people down by kicking them) had just finished building a platform around a huge algarrobo tree. kãrãnãri ãro kohi pata yotoharimai tutoonowei ha.

just finished, just completed. tutoonowei.

to fill (with water in a container). huyukai.

when I felt labor pains, I went to the forest. wa ninimou ha, karahi wa si he kema.

to feel labor pains. ninimou.

upriver speech. sufrafra.

not to sleep during the night. fmamo he wakarai.

at dawn Rabipelado left the collective dwelling. nãro re a horeprarou he wakarai yaioma (mit.

1. To be in a certain place or situation, until dawn. 2. To make it until dawn.. wakaka.

rope, bowstring (onomatopoeic). priti.

rope, bowstring. priti.

to indispose visitors by looking at them eat. maikaprai: indisponer a visitantes mirándolos comer.

indispose visitors. maikaprai.

(example sentence). pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

(example sentence). pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

to surround, to go around. ãyoyorán.

he was in his hammock and swinging with his foot while whistling. estaba en su chinchorro y se balanceaba con el pie mientras silbaba.

swinging. balanceaba.

supernatural beings of the yai the class that can cause illnesses and possess a person. fekrã.

your son-in-law. siyohahe.

the women will contemplate the gourd necks adorned with white down (= we will carry out the blood revenge and the women will see the funerary gourds). suwe ke pe wãrini shokatama ke kahiki horoi mi totihiopehe.

the women will contemplate the gourd necks adorned with white down (= we will carry out the blood revenge and the women will see the funerary gourds). totihiopehe.

did something to take the contents for oneself (plural object). oshokorerãrei.

to turn one. retakei.

the man went in company of the winged termites (mingled with the winged termites). feri ke ki nini thapore tao, wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

to mix or mingle with others during travel or migration. nikererayoherima.

to avoid an obstacle, or a prohibited relative, by going around it. hãroãi.

to close one. ãkiãkimou.

in all places the smallpox decimated the Yanomami people. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

to disappear, to be decimated. mrao.

infertile woman due to shapo. shapopi.

as for water, we will not lack it. pemaki rii yapekeope, mãu ke upe ha.

to have what is needed, to be independent. yapekeo.

I walked a little and fell into a hole. ya hutou tehe thekatheka hami ya kekema.

hole, hollow. theka.

The Yanomami consider it a repugnant animal, they refuse to touch it and of course they do not eat it. Los Yãnomãmi lo consideran un animal repugnante, se niegan a tocarlo y por supuesto no lo comen.

snail (unidentified (animal, plant)). warora.

(upriver dialect form of . nofi.

to reach a summit or ridge. matotokei.

to feel sick. yatheai.

there. there.

to separate the buttocks for a moment. horihitou.

he struck the yuvías against the people's noses, and broke them in that way. yãnomãmi the hushi pe ha hawari kokoki sheama, koko yahathomakema.

to split wood by striking one of its ends against the ground or something hard; to break a spherical object by hitting it with a stick; to open the shell of a woody fruit by hitting it against something. yahathoai.

I shot an arrow without a tip at him. shereka proke makasini ya the niyaprarema.

arrow with the tip removed (to kill small game, to play shooting arrows at each other). makasini.

to converse, exchange news in the course of a ceremonial dialogue. wãyou.

to leave a part of something for someone else. ayamakei.

to be placed on top of something. feaka.

hacer girar los. rakirakimo.

to acquire thickness, density or thickness. supraai.

they abandon the path to hunt paujíes (with the purpose of obtaining remeras for their arrows) (lit. pe rãmi paokei paruri imisi pe kãi niya ha niyaheni.

remera (feather) of the paují bird used for feathering arrows. fparuri.

he grabbed the head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break into several pieces. huhetimai.

to be in shreds, to be torn apart, to be overcooked (meat or fish). kohihiwe.

to walk unsteadily, to tremble in the legs, to walk shivering. rahirahiwe.

son, go gather wapu fruits (by hitting the branches with a stick). pusi, wapu ke ki wai ta yayopra.

to make something fall by throwing objects at it, to knock down an arrow stuck in a tree by throwing things at it. yashishi.

why did you let the fish swell on your return. weti te ha wa yuripi hoã ishiprohorou tarei.

to make swell, inflate something. proprokoamai.

to have had an itch (perfective of the terminative form). shihitirariyo.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to decrease a lot before going to kill fish in it. thookoramai.

(example sentence fragment). a ruruaprarai ha kutaruni, pe wai puhio ke yaro, he re mãrokoshi.

to shave someone. mãrokoshiai.

the dog curled up on itself. hiima a motorekema.

to coil up, curl up, form a ring or loop. motorekei.

that was the whistling call of one of ours. kamiye ke pemaki husho wã kuo kuhe: ése era el silbido de llamada de uno de los nuestros.

whistling. ce.

I am hungry. nashi hi ha suwe a ohotamoro.

to have a craving for something one did not previously crave. ohotatariyo.

to be hungry. ohotamomai.

the pubic hairs full of lice of the female toucan come here fluttering. mayepiriyoma pe no weshiki no nomapi re shuririyope.

are transported by the breeze. shuririyope.

here. rokido.

it is crowded with noises, voices. wã hithokãi.

to be crowded, to be packed (a place). hithokãi.

we have eaten cachicamo meat accompanied by plantains. kuratha a ha opo yama yãhi tehiama.

accompanied by, along with. tehiama.

I don't believe at all that you will stop wanting to eat meat, that's why I object (to that gift). wãrekoshiãmi pe ya puhi kuimiyo ha totihioni, ya wã rea kure.

to persist in refusal. wãrekoshiãmi.

the one that is over there. kihi a re kurahari.

I am the brother of the one hanging over there, in front. kihi a re yãrãhãri, ihi re kamiye ke yaheki.

to be situated at a distance, enfrente or río abajo (downstream) from the speaker. ãhãri.

lie down next to me for a while. eyemi ke a ta wariritaru.

to place oneself in that way for a moment. wariritou.

to perforate repeatedly (perfective aspect of the durative form). tiroshoakei.

I have my hair cut. ya miki peamou.

to have one. peamou.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

to shoot a thin palm wood arrow with a fire-hardened tip, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. tiheheai.

the spirit omawe koheriwe took possession of my pei no uhutipi and is chewing (devouring) it. omawe koheriweni ware a no uhutipi ha ipirekirini, ware a no wãi uhuti ta wãshikiãkirire.

dragonfly. ipirekirini.

I trace a line with onoto across my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to paint a curved line from one ear to the other across the forehead. huko*.

a beast usually lies in ambush here nearby, there is a beast ambushed. yaro a yetekou re ahetoimi, yaro a re yetek o p i y e i.

we left the palm grove behind, and then we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to be ambushed, to lie in ambush. yetekou.

to emerge vertically, to have an upward vertical movement. nimorãyou.

The river is wide. Pusi pei a wakepra.

river. pusi.

to remove an arrowhead from its shaft in the described manner. frahaka yãweteãi.

to remove something that is attached to something else by pushing it slightly from side to side (e.g. removing an arrowhead from an arrow shaft). yãweterei.

to find one's way again (after having lost it), to find the right direction again. fyo shi kateheprou.

that which can be untangled. katehamou.

to go far away. payekeai.

to stay behind for a long time. ãyoritao.

when one feels forced to lie down (due to the effect of hallucinogens), the posts that support the roof start to oscillate. the pe peritamai tehe, hãto ke nahi mohe pe hotehotemou.

to swing or oscillate. ayerikayerimo.

Shapokonayoma sat down next to me farting: "don't dirty my nose", I told him then. shapokonayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, shia keyeher o m a: "yare hiyokaki shamiãmai tikootihe", ya kutariyoma.

Shapokonayoma sat down next to me farting. Shapokonayoma.

to hang several bunches (of pijiguao palm fruits), plural object. ehemai.

Yoawe turned over again (in his hammock). Yoawe e mi hatuprou kooma.

to turn over, to roll over (in a hammock). hatuprou.

as he was angry, he was not eating. a ha hushuoni a iyanomi.

angry, enraged. hushuoni.

he separated several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to separate a banana shoot to give it away. tikarekei.

to lie face down on the floor (in a hammock, on a branch, etc.). yarehoo.

send the hekura to attack. wayurumou (cha.

to send the hekura to attack. wayurumo.

to ask someone how to do something. hiramakei.

to stick, affix multiple objects. utiakei.

to discover immediately, to see at first glance. yakeimi.

(sound of striking wood). krehe.

sound produced by a wooden object when struck. krehe.

(he) despiojó (removed lice from) a person passing a comb through their hair. noma pe yakekerarei.

to despiojar (remove lice) by passing a comb through the hair. yakekerarei.

to form blisters (terminative aspect). poshoprou.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and crush your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to crush something by hitting it with a stick. yatikiamai.

to make a domesticated bird perch, to let someone perch a bird, to wait for a bird to alight before shooting an arrow at it. romai.

to perch, to be perched; to alight, to be alighted. roo.

to have goosebumps. umokoyoripi.

to scratch (once) with the nails; to push with the nails to remove something, to push with. tisikiai.

to brace oneself with the feet (to make an effort). mamiki hitatao.

to brace oneself with the feet (to make an effort). hitatao.

the inside of the canoe is slippery. kanawa a mi takre.

to be slippery inside. takre.

(unidentified tree). parata hi.

multiply, proliferate. parata.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. wa wake ha paramapani.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. paramapani.

I do not stop having itches. the pe shihiti puhi reamoimi.

1. Renounce. 2. Question, discuss, argue, doubt. reamo.

to bring the firewood close to the fire. koã ãshoku titetekei.

to bring close to the fire, to draw near the fire. titetekei.

I will leave tomorrow (with my hammock, to sleep elsewhere). henaha ya hokeheripe.

they have just left the dwelling to go live elsewhere. hei tehe pe hokerayoherima.

to abandon the dwelling or camp (taking one. hoke.

you express yourself really well (during the ceremonial dialogue). waheki aka tao re totihiowei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to speak, to be able to speak (a young child); to speak fluently; to participate correctly in ceremonial dialogues; to be hospitable; to participate in gifts and exchanges. taowei.

I have opened the path there (making a detour around the obstacle). iha pei ya mayo pahetia ãyoã shoareherima.

Jaguar took another path and made a long detour. ãyoyo shomi ke yoka ha ira ke a pata ãyoãtaroma.

to place around, surround, make a detour. ãyoyoãi.

I stopped taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

because they did not want to desist, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to renounce doing something; to stop doing what one used to do. tiraarei.

to be painted with a transverse line. oni hahetia.

to have been cut transversely at the end; to be painted or drawn with a transverse line. hahetia.

she entered the dwelling and returned to her mother without anyone noticing. pe nii ke iha a horea re hãthokeiwei (mit.

returned without being noticed. hãthokeiwei.

ribs (bone and flesh). reponahiki.

she was dancing on the sand. mrakatahu ke a ha.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksands attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

sand, sandy beach. mrakatahu.

vine, Anomospermum sp. (Menispermaceae), a bitter vine used in preparation. patema.

food that was stirred in that way. tikorema.

having steadied oneself on one. kayeria.

I have slippery hands and everything slips out of them all the time (= my hands are so slippery that I can't hold onto it). ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

he lowered the turtle (making it slide along its support) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to drip, slide over something (an elongated object); to slip over something and fall; to let oneself slide along a trunk; to slip out of the hand; to go down a steep slope. yohou.

they climbed (the mountain) and, as they were climbing, Kasima felt dizzy. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a.

implies a linear downward movement (or the reverse), to descend following a straight line, to march in a line, to place oneself at the foot of a tree, etc.. -the-.

the child was already stiff from death. kasheshewe ihiru ke a wãri kua waikirayoma.

to have an erect penis. mo kasheshewe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. kasheshe.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

it sank. paotariyoma.

this onoto comes from the Waika, don't you see that it speaks like them. ei waika nana ke e nou, ei ke e nou ma re pashiomouwei.

to speak like the people from upriver, to speak with an accent, to speak a language that differs slightly from the local way of speaking. pashiomou.

barely used, hardly worn out. tute.

Yotenama begins to suffer the effects of the pepper smoke (myth) and also it can be The word 'praki' in Yanomami means '(related word)'. praki pe wake shini yotenama a teai (mit. It is an Noun. ): Yotenama empieza a sufrir los efectos del humo del ají.

to dry (something). praki.

I am in disagreement, you see that I do not approve and I remain silent. ya puhi reatarou ha totihioni, "awei", ya kuu mai re ya kua totihipei ma re kuhe.

I do not approve and remain silent. totihipei.

we fled running. yamaki rereai kuaaherima.

let's flee, older brother. ãiwe, peheki ta rereheri.

to run away, to flee. rererayou.

domestic. domésticas.

they discovered us when we were surrounding the house. yama yãno he hãyomai tehe, yamareki tararemahe.

surround, encircle (multiple objects). hãyomai.

Estar iniciando la última parte de un trayecto. poushokukei.

to move hesitantly or falteringly. rãikikãi.

to be completely smooth, to be smooth and moist. frikihiwe.

the two claws of a crab. pei yorahepiki.

claw of a crustacean, particularly of a crab. yorahepi.

the wapu fruits are still bitter (= still not edible, still have not lost their poison). wapu ke ki koãmi shoawe.

bitter, sour, acrid. koãmirimi.

to be angry. shopari wake.

to be angry. shopari.

frog. boans.

they transported me in a hammock tied to a pole. yare hiki pou kuaamahe.

pole that two people hold at the ends. arana*mou.

he is angry. mataremi thotho.

to be angry. mataremi.

said of substances that can be mixed. koyokamou.

to press, to squeeze. hisiniãi.

(he) allowed (someone) to catch up. he waro.

to allow someone to catch up (by walking slowly or stopping). waromakei.

while the others were away, they stayed at home to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou ha heani.

to stay, remain, be present during someone. heani.

enemy warriors came here to ambush. wayu pe rokeyoruma.

to come to ambush, to come stealthily. rokeyoruma.

son, we go down to place (on your chest) the music trumpets (the hekura say during an initiation). shete ipa mathono yamaki ta titithayo (cha.

trumpet. mathono.

tree. maynensis.

the Yanomami mix malefic substances with the soil of footprints and are always pronouncing people's personal names. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi, wa the pe hore peyeprai si ihehea ha.

to mix a malefic substance (heri) with the soil of a collected footprint, to make the owner of the footprint sick and possibly die; to cast a magic substance towards someone. raraprai.

I noticed that the peccaries had eaten the corn plants in the cultivated field. hikari theka hami kayuri peni yono mosi wai no thareshi.

in/towards the cultivated field. fhikari hami.

plant species. kuhãwe nathosi.

plant species. krããma nathoshi.

plant. nathosi.

tree (unidentified). korori hi.

to roll over when falling. yoririai.

to acquire the color that certain plant products take when oxidized, like potatoes and cassava after being peeled for some time; also the color that certain banana compotes take if not consumed immediately. mishi ruthe.

to acquire a certain color. ruthe.

to be elevated, high. heru.

cassava flour prepared in a way that leaves some liquid inside. urera.

we regrouped and launched ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

we launched ourselves down the slope. nihoroparukirini.

to address the community, give a speech, express complaints, give an opinion on a matter, incite to work, recount a dream, etc.. patamou.

to become shallow, to decrease in depth. resiprou.

to break into several pieces. yahekirariyo.

to start cooling something down. ahiprai.

to take, give or receive two objects at a time. yãhuãi.

when one possesses arrows, as we do, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

to be in a condition to kill (someone). hetuoni.

she tore her clothes, hiding her private parts (lit. ihiru e kipi pesi ha kakaprarini, omawe ke kipi hitheprai shoarayoma.

to hide several objects. hitheprai.

Pole for planting made of pijiguao wood. rasha husi.

he shot Titiri in the stomach with a blowgun dart. titiri a horaprarema, amoku ha pe the totihia re shoakeiwei (mit.

stomach. ãmoki.

Echo and ready to be transported. Õkãprawe y listas para ser transportadas.

echo. okãprawe.

some hekura hunters of danta joined the son of Õmawe (whom I possess as hekura, in my chest) and that is the reason why I am still a good hunter. omawe pe ihirupi iha shama niyatimi a ha ithooproni, ya the pe yaropi niyãi nosiye.

that is the reason. ithooproni.

temporarily vacant dwelling or camp. mathokai.

the horoeti trees break easily. horoeti hi pe kreyou si ihehewe.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

he gets angry for no reason. a hushuo si ihehewe.

frequently; certainly, without a doubt. ihehei.

to cut a stick so that its end is completely flat and smooth, as done by large beetles of the simitori species when they gnaw on tree branches. simiti.

they put (the two) a capuchin monkey tail around their heads. wisha shina pe yohopiararema.

to tuck the tail between the legs (dog). shina kareretou.

tail; plume. shina.

to have recovered from the effects of a hallucinogen. wakakarayou.

to have become spotted or mottled locally. hayapishirayou.

to crush diverging, to disperse. raipraai.

strap or strip from bark (upriver dialect). nai natha siki.

they are always being told (uselessly) not to do it. pe wasimou no tetemi.

tell them. wasimou.

the day is about to rise (the speaker is in the house). the mi uhehepei.

to widen, to open up. wãhete.

both are short in stature. kama ke kipi hotakawe.

are short in stature. hotakawe.

messenger. teshomo.

they offer me fish one after the other. yuri pe ha ware a topei notiatarouhe.

they offer/give one after the other. notiatarouhe.

to remove the damaged or bruised part of a fruit by making a circular incision with a sharp object. yakore.

I am afraid. krokema ãsi.

to be afraid. krokema.

to go outside. enconmapei.

noise, signal that precedes the return of the hunters. fheniyomi pe heã.

a prolonged expedition; a hunter who goes camping for several days in the jungle carrying food with him, to look for game animals, which he will bring back to the dwelling after having smoked them in the camp. This meat is generally consecrated to the realization of a funerary ritual, or intended for the guests of a feast that brings together several communities.. fheniyomi.

to bear a superficial wound. si yahewe.

to have a superficial wound, to bear a scratch. yahewe.

I hit to collect honey tima, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to have opened a hollow object, to have opened a hollow trunk. pawehekei.

to have the habit of, to do assiduously. yairicon.

to make round, spherical. komoreãmai, inc.

to make round, spherical. komoreãmai.

son, do not sit with your legs bent. shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai.

son, young male. shetewe.

hey you all, there are váquiros, váquiros. ware ke ki, ware.

there are váquiros (a type of bird). ware.

and if I went hunting on my own (without the others). ya ta rãmi huu ayao sho.

the parrot had started talking (on its own) at the moment when the gallineta took flight. kurikaya ke a wã wãri haa re ayarayonowei, hãshimo a hokeprou tehe (mit.

to walk on one. aya.

to decapitate. fhe pahetiprai.

to decapitate. pahetiprai.

Horonãmi who was lost found Cachicamo. horonãmi a mohoru ha kuparuni, moro a tararema (mit.

to get lost, to stray. mohoruu.

to become less dense, to clear up (vegetation); to put order in what is crammed. wararaai.

long ago, the bees spoke. hei hapa totihiwe puu pe ã hama.

to speak. ãhama.

to paint a sinuous or broken line on someone's face. mi eyekeai.

to paint a sinuous or broken line on someone. mi eyekeai.

my son, I am also not in good health. oãsi, kamiye sho peheki no thawemi.

to not be in good health. no thawemi.

to stretch down, make wide (a carrying strap) [with plural objects]. prayukamai.

my son, here comes the buzzing that precedes (and announces) the arrival of the puriwa (during initiation rites). a reãã wã re pariimi ye.

the zumbido (buzzing/humming sound) that precedes and announces the arrival of the puriwa. pariimi.

ceremonial dialogue: you will often go to war (lit. wayamou, diálogo ceremonial: irás a menudo a la guerra (lit. : you will ambush in many places). : te emboscarás en muchos lugares).

place where those on an expedition ambushed (during a ceremonial dialogue). yapikouwe.

they had invited guests to a feast and saw them in a dream. the pe shoayou kuaai ha kuikuni, pe thapi ha thariheni.

dream, premonitory dream. thapi.

Translation:. hãkãmiki sherere.

(habla de río arriba.). herere.

wing (the bone and flesh). fãtãtãmãpi.

with what will I cut it in two?. hãniprape?.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. wa wake ha paramapani.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. paramapani.

the man is angry. wariomi koheki.

to be angry. koheki.

I ask you to pile up the wood here in large quantities and in several piles. eyeha ãsho komi ta hiraapotuhe.

pile of wood. hiraapotuhe.

he hit the rock with his machete, and the pieces flew away. maa ma pe ha sipara a ha tihekikini, the nikashi yuturayoma.

he stumbled. yuturayoma.

since you have the habit of obtaining pendants from others, put them in the lobes of my ears (= offer me those metal pieces). wa no hutukapi teapra ma kutaeni, hei pei ya yimikaki ha a ta huupari.

pendants. hutukapi.

to crisscross logs or pieces of wood to sit on (and isolate oneself from the ground). parithaai.

expr. fa hohoruã re tetere.

1. to snore loudly, 2. to decrease (water level). tetere.

to receive from a person an object that this person has obtained from another. piyemapei.

tree, cojoba, also called yopo and Anadenanthera peregrina (Leg., Mimosaceae). Mimosakuo.

1. Squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; squeeze the juice out of a fruit in this way; squeeze the pulp of grated cassava to remove the juice, inside a cloth held in the hand; deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. 2. Have been squeezed locally.. ãhuhu.

to embrace with the arms, legs or feet. wapu tiprusharewe.

to embrace, to hug. tiprusharewe.

he did not delay. weyade.

the blue body of Yãmonãmãriwe did not take long to swell. yãmonãmãriwe yetu ke a pata hãepotopi hããi ha kuparuni.

to swell, inflate, dilate. thoroho.

pliega el brazo. poko ta tishakoiku.

pliega el brazo. tishakoiku.

the small stream of water becomes narrower and narrower. poko u he horokoai.

to end abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horoko.

cut in slices the cooked wapu fruit. fwapu hikei.

to cut in slices the cooked wapu fruit. fwapu.

you will call us cowards unjustly. kamiye wamare he hore yathepe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to treat someone as a coward. yathei.

perfective form of the intransitive verb . sheririrayou.

we were building shelters for the night when those who had gone to kill fish arrived in turn. yamaki perimou tehe iha pe mi hetuai, yuri pe re niyaiwehei.

to arrive after others. heturayou.

Deceased woman (ceremonial discourse or serious speech about death). cokohomo.

to be sick, to be possessed by kamakari [orãmi kamakaripiai, inc. forãmi kamakaripi.

to be possessed by the spirit of the dead, to be sick from ingesting the ashes of a dead person. kamakaripiai.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much. nihitao.

it is hot. shiki katohi.

to be hot. katohi.

to fold the legs of a dead bird by turning them so that the claws hook behind the thighs (in order to carry it on one. yoreke.

the children eat the pulp of the cucuritos scraping it with their teeth. ihiru peni kareshi pe wãhehãihe.

scraping it with the teeth. wãhehãihe.

hurry up. rokita ropaiku.

to dry with heat. roki.

prohibit; tell someone not to participate in a fight or war (say it once). wapekai.

to execute a task together, to do all together. komipramai.

to become beautiful. riyehai.

position yourself at an adequate distance from him/her. ware pe tikukua.

to position oneself at an adequate distance, neither too close nor too far away (by approaching or moving away). tikukua-.

village of maleficent supernatural beings, associated with steep riverbanks. They can take possession of the pei mi ãmo (soul) of humans. weyoweyori.

when the child was climbing (on the tree), a certain number (of women) stayed behind to bathe. hei ihiru a tiketia ha yaiikuni, ei naha the pe yãrimou ha heikuni.

to do it quickly. tiketou.

to smooth, to make smooth. frakah.

they (both) responded two times. the kipi ã hua re porakarayouwei.

they (both) responded two times. porakarayouwei.

to recline an object that was perpendicular to the ground, to incline; to make a celestial body decline (in mythology). kaiamai.

to crumble, to collapse. hashishou.

the Espíritu-guacamaya tends the ear to listen. arariwe e he re aharape.

to listen. aharape.

to stick out the tongue. aka wae.

I removed the ocumos (from the boiled water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to remove, extract multiple objects from water or food by catching them with something (a stick, spoon, etc.). hikeprarini.

we are dispersed and that's how we advance. pemaki rãkokowe ke pemaki kurayoheri.

"they already hate us", we say as we pass by. "pemareki nohi wãripou waikiwehe", yamaki kurayoheriiwei.

to advance, to move forward. kurayoheri.

to accumulate little by little, to perform a task little by little; to cook a large amount of food in several stages. yãshimai.

if you don't have anything to exchange, I don't feel like showing you (what I possess). mãroko ha ya the no mimapimi (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

I don. mimapimi.

while the young men tie leaves (to represent the effigy of an enemy) they will position themselves (lit. huya peni henaki okãihe tehe, mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripaharuhe.

to tie, to bind. okãihe.

to buzz. tereremou.

to mix, stir, agitate (liquid) with the fingertips. tikoremai.

dense vegetation. prorururayou.

he took the woman by the arm in turn and made love silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to make love (said by a man, jokingly). nihoronihoromou.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty of inhabitants (dwelling, camp). rorokãi.

oily, greasy, having the consistency and appearance of oil or fat. tapi-tapi.

where the leaves bend down. henaki re teire hami.

to bend, to incline (perfective). teirayou.

the man was in the middle of many termites that were piled up inside the hammocks hung close together. osheri ke pe yayomope hami yãnomãmi ke the re nikerepariyonowei.

to be crowded together, piled up. yayomope.

the fire has only caught in certain places. ayakelaje.

the bow covered in resin remained leaning there. the hãtopi nahi sipo tapitapipi rakipraa heaa.

to be located, to be positioned. heaa.

to make something beautiful, to do something correctly and carefully. koshãpikei.

the ashes were not at all recent. pi no kirii.

the weave of the mapire is too tight. the siki wai yorehi sheniniwe no kirii.

not at all. no kirii.

To wear out from use. waruhu.

to let oneself be caught in the rain. he maapii.

to let oneself be caught in the rain. maapii.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the tapirs scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

disperse (and make parallel rows). pe mi ta yoããheri.

to scatter, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoo.

he arrived at a place where there were blue-headed parrots (scattered in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema.

I'm going to have myself painted with wavy lines on my body. ya oni eyekepramou.

indicates a plurality of subjects (or possible subjects). pramo.

to turn over an eyelid. mamo kasi yoreo.

to turn over an eyelid (by playing). yoreo.

null. yakohe.

to stand at the entrance, to keep one. hewehe.

to have the habit of hiding in a particular place, to hide one after another. hithepraai.

to move in a very small group of two people. kororoai.

the people upriver speak without ceasing about us, I know it (lit. hei ora theri ke pe ã wai wayou kuyehewe ya yimika ma re kuuwei.

speak without ceasing. kuyehewe.

in each place, they renounced. the pe tiraatarama.

indicates the repetition of the same event in different places (spatial discontinuity), whether it is carried out by the same actor moving from one place to another, or by different actors situated in different places, or simply a little dispersed (spatial discontinuity). -atara-.

to start making sharp or rough. namoprai.

a plant used in black magic. wakamoshiki.

to strangle. forãmi hiyãi.

to feel a tickle in the throat when having a cold. forãmi shi horerewe.

skin of the neck. orãmi si.

throat, neck. forãmi.

he tied the capuchin monkey's tail around his head, and smoothed it with his hand. ha yohoreni, the teshina hokokama.

tied the capuchin monkey. yohoreni.

the great rock came slowly to collide against the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki pata rakiariyoma (mit.

to lean against, to support against, to collide with. raki.

you (plural), the ones who live there (in different places), you do nothing but lie. kihami wamaki re perihii wamaki hore kashiwe.

you (plural) who live in different places. perihii.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

glance. ojeada.

did you simply warn him. wa wã fai poohawe.

I will be content with gutting him. ya shipe niya thaai ha puoni.

to do (without caring about the consequences), to do (without apparent reason); to be content with. poohawe.

supernatural evil beings immediately opened his chest. yai theni pariki pakekeprai nokarayoma (mit.

I responded immediately to their shots, I heard them groan. ya pe niyaprai nokarayoma, pe rããmorãy o m a.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to occur immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. pakekeprai.

the smell of decomposing vegetables. rutheruthe ke pe ni.

the smell of decomposing vegetables. rutheruthe.

to make love (a woman) (lit. fnaka pata yãshãmap o u.

certainly it is here where she has made love. eyeha the kahiki pata yãshãmapou ayaonowei ke the.

to have open, to be open. yãshãmap.

we stayed ambushed for a long time, then we gathered when we were tired. yamaki retaoma, yamaki reo ha mohipraruni yamaki kokãmou.

to stay ambushed for a long time. retaoma.

it is necessary that you inhale the hallucinogenic ayukuma regularly (ceremonial dialogue). ayukuma wa pe wãri ha koaprani (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

hallucinogenic. ayukuma.

to rot, to decompose. poi-.

they took them dead to the shapono plant; they killed them and threw them into the fire. nomaremi ke ki nimashapono hami pe kãi nomawe.

a plant used in sorcery to kill. nomaremi.

to be tall and abrupt. hotewe.

above all do not tell them to shoot them with guns (during the attack). kopeta e niyããmãi tikoo mai.

to shoot them with guns. niyããmãi.

to find one's way again (after being lost), to find the right direction again. fyo shi kateheprou.

to disentangle (durative aspect). katehou.

if you don't have anything to exchange, I don't feel like showing you (what I possess). mãroko ha ya the no mimapimi (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

I don. mimapimi.

to have half-closed eyes, as someone who is sleepy; to have eyes slightly open to look surreptitiously. shukukuwe.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or cambures so that they ripen). yarororariyo.

to crack. hãthotho.

they made the rahara monster grow, they had it as a pet animal. rahara ke ki ha yawemariheni, ke ki hiima pomahe.

they made it grow, they raised it. yawemariheni.

I always respond to the demands of brave men. yãnomãmi kurahewe the pe riha ya the pe ã huamai si ihehewe.

brave. kurahewe.

patagrulla tree, Amphirrhox longifolia (Violaceae). wãshãmonama.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit. kesherayou.

it. pepraai.

to have been divided into many parts (a round object). hakaroma no.

to have repeated a message verbatim without mistakes. sharirikei.

to split a tobacco leaf in two along the central vein. pee nahe ayakosi.

to split or divide in two. ayakosi.

deceased mother. shatipariyo.

(myth): Is it not for lack of tobacco that I lament. peshi perke pe wayu ha ya wã wãri pewe.

campsite or shelter near people already settled. perke.

to sleep or live in a hammock hung close to the ground. yatotokei.

desgranar maíz. fyono hushishai.

crumbled, cracked. hushisha.

put/place the head on crossed arms, full of fire ants. mohe ta poiku, kashi ke pe.

out of anger he put/placed his head on his crossed arms. a hushuoripi mohe pokema.

to put/place the head on crossed arms. poiku.

The unidentified tree is tall. Mapayawe namohi a mão.

tall. mão.

they have just gone flying. pe pe yeayou ke a kuhe.

to go flying. yeayou.

your friend. no rimihe.

his/her friend. pe no rimipi.

friend, person with whom one has a relationship of exchange. rimiye.

I will not stay quiet, I will go live elsewhere. ya he ononoo totihio mai ke the.

to raise the nose to sniff. hiyokaki mi nonoo.

then, Jaguar raised its head (towards him). pata nonotou re shoarayonowei.

to be quiet; not to take the time to do something; to raise the nose/head to sniff/look up. nonoo.

he fell and cried out in pain. a ha kerini, a rããmorayoma.

cried out in pain. rããmorayoma.

upstream (of a river). feaiwei.

what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me. kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by pulling with the hand, exerting lateral pressure). hoyopa.

in the place where the muddy bottom emerges above the water. u katikatipi re repiyeti ha.

muddy bottom that emerges from the water during the dry season. repiyeti.

when he was young and importuned the women, he always remained in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to remain, to constitute a remainder. hushuani.

I will transport a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

to transport a heavy load. prearei.

the big snake was writhing (on the ground). oru keki pata himonemou kukem a.

snake. himonemou.

to be riddled with holes or punctures (termination aspect). tereshãprou.

to cut in two. pakaroprai.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami (carried by the current) were passing one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma (mit.

to have been partially emptied or filled (perfective aspect of the inchoative). hayarorayou.

I slipped and fell. ya ha kaherini ya kerayoma.

I slipped and fell. kaherini.

doblarse sobre sí mismo; doblarse, retorcerse. aweawemo.

come here to blow the fire. koa wake ta horapayo.

come here to blow the fire. horapayo.

the ashes of the dead swell in the stomach (after being ingested). pei pusi hami matohi the pe hu1 sus.

I was ambushed, no one came, and a whistling call was heard. ya reoma, the pe kuproimi ha pe the pe husi heã petariyo k u r e i.

to swell, dilate. hu1.

as we don't have a shotgun to hunt, I will kill you with my arrows in turn; I am really going to wash myself with soap (lit. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani, ihi a ma kuini pe wãri prapou mi fetuo ta totihio.

to speak like people from upriver. pashimou.

to clean a place. yasikiai.

(antonym of aka porepiai). aka hayu.

that small thing that is carried tucked between the loincloth and the skin (a knife), I have brought this bow to trade it. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei.

that small thing that is carried tucked between the loincloth and the skin (a knife). hãkiãwei.

while the young men tie leaves (to represent the effigy of an enemy) go to position (lit. huya peni henaki okãihe tehe, mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripaharuhe.

go to position (lit.: set up their bows) in front of the path. paripaharuhe.

to become sticky. husupiai.

in an instant, Lagarto cut in several pieces the beehive that he let fall, then he slid down along the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to slide quickly along a trunk (to go down). erorou.

when the earth was undermined, the trees inclined slowly. hiki hishiai kuaai ha kuikuni, hiki opisi wekeataroma.

they inclined slowly. wekeataroma.

in the proximity. ahete ha vode.

proximity. vode.

to extract something with the hand several times with a quick gesture. mãomãomai.

bambú (no identificado). hayariwe.

many paujíes took flight. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

they flew away, took flight. yeprariyoma.

null. shithora.

to present marks of several impressions (the ground). kãshikiprawe.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock one after the other. yakapraai.

to appear, to form (light spot on the skin). wahipiprou.

to become fragile or brittle. yeririprou.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

the beverage of the yawari. yawari uku.

I. uku.

we moved at night. titi ha re pemaki huatarou haruu.

to do at night. faru.

to speak. kati.

to lie or be one against the other. hoohãthão.

to sharpen. hirosho.

perhaps you have a desire to kill me. pei yare wetiai puhi toprao thawe.

1. To border, limit (a surface) 2. To kill (said during a ceremonial dialogue). wetimai.

to crush a soft object with the foot; to step on a dangerous object. karukurei.

to keep close. ahetepou.

to wrinkle, to wilt. ãpreteãi.

if they come to visit us, I will hide the pot in the forest. pe hamamou ha urihi hami hapoka ya si hithekei.

to hide, to conceal. thekei.

peshi himou: to proclaim one's desire to make love. peshi himou: proclamar su deseo de hacer el amor.

desire. peshi.

there where the water is deep. u hamo kuope ha.

deep water. u hamo.

he metió la cabeza (y dijo): "¡cuñado, aléjate. fe rukei fa yauafe r i n i: "shori, a ta prahari. ". ".

decapitaron al jaguar y colgaron su gran cabeza. ira ke he pata pahetiprai ha kuparuheni, he pata yauamai ha kuparuheni.

head. yauafe.

he went to see another path. ai yo re miãkeiwei.

to go to see. miãkeiwei.

one after another, they exhausted the firewood. koã ãsho pe mi watheapotayomahe.

they exhausted the firewood. watheapotayomahe.

to be lightly sugared. cateti.

black horsefly (unidentified animal). wãreware ãsi.

black horsefly (unidentified animal). wãware.

to break into several pieces. wetirariyo.

to leave something to cool down. pothothoprou.

to move from one place to another, to make the rounds. aha.

don't believe that I will stay to live with you, no, I'm going somewhere else. heha a periope tao, wahe nohi thapotihe, shomi hami ya h u u.

believe, think, say something about someone. periope.

kingfisher. siemato.

teeth. hisha.

to thicken (a liquid), to become slightly pasty; to soften a little, to become malleable. yãhihãi.

the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the water surface. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma.

to appear briefly on the surface, to execute a regular up and down movement on the water surface. pokepokemou.

to plan to do everything. ya niaata hasen.

to plan to do something (sleep, urinate, defecate, etc.). hasen.

here, in this place, he had received a deep wound in the chest. eyeha ke totihi, pei ke pariki hami ke the ka pata ha wãyãkãoperei.

to have received a deep wound. wãyãkã.

habla del sur del Orinoco. siko.

to take a pinch of. rishiãi.

to keep the bowstring at the heel of an arrow. maketamai.

he went back home when he had finished speaking. e kuu tehe a koã ha koruherini.

to return home, to go back home. koruheri.

Carpintero verdoso (a type of bird). iriweni.

object that was scraped in the indicated manner. shorerano.

to scrape off the surface of an object with the edge of an instrument. shorerai.

it is full to the brim. he rahoprawe.

to be full to the brim. rahoprawe.

to pass and return. weyoyoweyoyo.

hallucinogen whose effect persists. wayu rape.

I feel like vomiting. ya no suharayopi.

to vomit. suharayou.

the váquiros were getting close to the place where we were ambushed. yamaki re reayoruawei ha ware ke pe ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

to get close to. titeteprou.

to have become rough, dry and rigid due to heat. roparayou.

he insisted on calling me again and then I had a desire to accompany him. yare nakai he yatioma, ya ohotatariyoma.

to have a desire for something that one previously did not want. ohotatariyo.

he placed it on the ground, in the place where the cassava dough was drying. nashi hipe re makepe ha a prakema.

to place on top of something. makepe.

to place a thick layer of leaves on a roof to waterproof it. sutamapei.

a little child crying in the absence of its parents; to cry for a dead person. pokomou.

to cry, to weep, to lament. wãno.

I went there reluctantly. ya huu mohioma.

to go somewhere reluctantly, unwillingly. mohioma.

to speak. mi yãhuyãhu.

snout, muzzle of certain mammals (tapir, danta, etc.). ﬁyokasi.

to install hammocks one under the other and in different places. pepipramou.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoiku.

to embrace, to hug. waporoa.

they passed the tobacco rapidly with negligence through the ashes (to prepare a chew). oi ya he pehi kãi papasaron rápido con negligencia el tabaco por la shokai ma kure.

to pass rapidly with negligence. tapranomi.

to begin to grow large (a tobacco plant). kumamasiãi.

the demon women of dusk. weyariyoma.

to be pleated/folded in several places, to be completely pleated/folded. wãhihãi.

stagnant water covered with a film, probably due to the activity of bacteria or other microorganisms. hererepiprou.

my mother-in-law pretends that the wapu fruits are (still) hard. yayeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai.

my mother-in-law. yaye.

in the forest there are fallen fruits [hirerarei, perf. wapu pe hirawe.

to place a heavy object on one. hirerarei.

the path forks. yo shererea.

1. to divide, separate, move away from others temporarily to live apart, definitively separate from the community to go live elsewhere 2. to divide, separate; to take a part from a whole. shekere.

to become wrinkled, flabby or crumpled (locally). wãprete.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. matotowe.

to make oneself accompanied by a hammock. peramou.

to place a limit on a surface, to limit. tirorokei.

to get oneself painted with round spots. hikikãmou.

I burned myself in a bonfire, and that's how I became big. relakurei (mit.

I burned myself in a bonfire, and that. relakurei.

the sky clears up again. the heão koã.

to clear up after the rain (the sky). heãkei.

to have a desire to vomit. suhahawe.

trees (plural). ãsihiki.

(synonym for yakeke). yakeke.

Desiderative verb compound, allomorph of tamapariyo in the presence of derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning.. tamapari.

Horonãmi who was lost found Cachicamo. horonãmi a mohoru ha kuparuni, moro a tararema (mit.

to get lost, to stray. mohoruu.

Swartzia grandifolia tree. kamakari sihi.

he wants to go live elsewhere, what does he have against me. yare thapi heiaprarai, weti ke the no peshiri ha thaani.

why do you feel resentment towards my mother-in-law. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

to feel regret or resentment for the loss of an object (lost, stolen, broken); to hold a grudge or resentment towards someone. peshiri.

Aheanariwe ran opening a path through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

mythological ancestor. Aheanariwe.

to place vertically, to put vertical (perfective durative, plural object). yororoãmakei.

the people of Poriporimapiwei detested us a lot; we were very agitated. poriporimapiwei theri peni wamareki napemai heparoomahe.

we were very agitated or upset. heparoomahe.

excavo la tierra (asestando golpes con el machete o con el cuchillo) en busca de lombrices. kohoromi ya shiki tiyei.

mientras excavaban la tierra para desenterrar las batatas, éstas cantaban como cantan los piapocos cuando se reúnen. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe huko mo pe mayepimoma (mit.

tallar, tumbar, derrumbar, excavar, desenterrar. tiyei.

Carpintero enano se hinchó y la plataforma (sobre la cual estaba colocado el cadáver) se distendió. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini, hii hiki noshi hariraama.

1. to bray, to scream; 2. to swell, to distend, to dilate. nosiye.

to shave someone. mãrokoshimai.

they cooked in water the pieces of Trueno's liver, and ate them immediately. yãru ãmo pe ha tupaheni, ãmo pe wai ha kuparuheni.

they cooked. tupaheni.

to move from hearth to hearth, to make the rounds of the central plaza. ãyorii.

habla de río arriba. wãkomi.

to remain, to constitute a remainder, to survive. heprou.

to hit, to strike, to collide. tihekikelo.

the noise fades away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to stop gradually (noise, voice). manashiprou.

quédense tranquilos. karihou mai pe ta kuiku.

quedarse tranquilo, no agitarse. karihou.

when the dawn broke. wawetomi wapoko.

dawn, daybreak. wawetomi.

the noise fades away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to fade away gradually (noise, voice). manashirayou.

dialogues. diálogos.

dejar la mano posada. warimapou.

to let someone pass, to allow someone to pass. hayuamai.

then you have to place several logs on top of each other. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

to lie on top of each other, to be sick and lie on one object then another. fmakeke.

there is not much. a peherimi o a peheri kuami.

in small quantity, in small number. peherimi.

to have a worried or furrowed brow. yakukou.

it was under the sand and, as it moved, it caused the surface to move. kihami mrakatahu re e hirehiremai kuaai shoaoheriiwei (mit.

to cause a disturbance on the surface (by moving underneath it). shoaoheriiwei.

to crack, to split open. nashoai.

decorate your foreheads with white down, yes, that's what must be done. wama weyoku paushimai ha kuparuni, aye minahami.

to decorate, paint and adorn with feathers or bird skins. weyoku.

I was sitting (a moment ago). ya ma re roohe.

progressive aspect marker. RV-progr.

now, immediately. opi.

the sun advances, it approaches the horizon. kihi mothoka kuaai kure, pe the hiririwe ke, pe the hirirou totihia ke a kure.

to approach the horizon (celestial body). hiriri.

to stop and move alternately. hothotou.

to make tobacco spicy by preparing it properly. nakiprou.

they will offer him sweet potatoes. huko mo e pe hipemahe.

he went there to distribute pijiguaos. kihami rasha ke pe hipema.

to offer, to give. hipema.

to soften locally. epehemakei.

Bat went to stick (along a tree trunk). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

to become sticky, gooey. sutiai.

if you are always disputing with them, the Yanomami will take your footprint to do sorcery on you. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi wa the pe hore peyeprai si perihi ihehea ha.

to dispute with someone, to scold, to get angry with someone. peyeprayou.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to split, to tear off. huhetiai.

(he) spent the night again in a different place than where he usually lives. shoriwe tahiapi a he weyai shi ha topraoni.

to spend the night. he weyai.

to strike with the foot during a fight (a bird). kakekai.

it was not long before the turtle's (sick) head suddenly drooped. poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to find oneself suddenly off balance, to be on the verge of sliding into the void. reiprao.

those (knowing the region) knew that that stream of water was the last (they said): "this is the last (there is no other)". mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i.

1. to not accompany; 2. to leave a part of something for someone, to leave a remainder, to not eat everything, to not give everything. heikiai.

to collect tobacco by cutting the petiole with the nails, to offer tobacco collected in that manner to someone. tirikei.

the rocky face of Mount Mashohara shines beautifully. mashoharapiwei ki pariki pata re shutukahe noshi re harirape e.

the rocky face of Mount Mashohara. mashoharapiwei.

to mash and knead cambures with a forked stick. tiprokoprai.

to mash and knead cambures (a type of fruit) with a long stick with a forked end, agitating it up and down. tiprokoprai.

to have a period (menstruation). iyemou.

as (the turtle) had its head sunk (in the shell), it observed it and turned it over several times. pei ke pe he wai taroa ha yairini, a mima, pe mi hatuatarama.

to sink deeply. tarorayou.

the snake eggs are agglutinated (they form clusters). oru ke ki nathe shimokore.

1. To become abundant, form abundant clusters or bunches of fruits. 2. To agglutinate, form clumps. 3. To swell slightly (like the skin after an insect bite). shimokoreãi.

I'm going to break a dry branch (hitting it against the ground). koã ya ãhusi wãri ta yahekia.

dry branch. koã ãhusi.

object whose edge has been folded several times over itself. kohewe.

there is a wide open space (in the middle of the vegetation). the ka yakeo prahawe.

we left the arrow canes (to dry in the sun) in a place where the trees left a piece of sky uncovered. the misi ka yakeo kuope ha yama pe shereka ropramai.

to slide through vegetation. yakekei.

to be almost extinguished. wãnonoã.

to be agitated on the surface. hirehire.

to be about to have one. oromashipramou.

he plucked Titiri (shooting him with a blowgun dart). titiri u pe re tishishireiwei (mit.

hair; short feather or down; fiber. arapuri.

to be carrying a load by supporting it on the shoulders with a strap. pakatamapou.

the voice of the ancestor came from the bottom of the den (saying): "come to get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni: "ware ta koreyo. ". ".

come to get me. koreyo.

to accumulate. tikamarei.

when it is cut, it is extremely tough and viscous (the flesh of the disease demon). the ki pata hãnimou yoripi yihitiwe no kirii (cha.

to be completely dry and hard. yihitiwe.

to attract someone. sukusukumou.

to fan the fire, to wave at someone by waving an outstretched hand. yahuhai.

Bring me (carrying on your back) a jaguar mandible. wa ki re homomaiwei, weti ipa naki ta yehimapa.

mandible (literally: tooth, used here for mandible). homomaiwei.

knives, knives there were, but the two children have spoiled them and there are no more. kushiyo re pe kuoma ma kui ihiru ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

knife. kushiyo.

she is pregnant (it is very visible). fa maka oshemi.

she is pregnant (it is very visible). oshemi.

to be always going and coming despite extreme thinness (joking). mi shoeshoeãprarou.

to become thin, to lose weight, to have a sunken belly. shoeke.

to make love noisily (said by a man). kohekohemo.

has. tiene.

to lower a little (the water level). fu manaheheãi.

to lower a little (the water level). manaheheãi.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than; to place closer to a certain limit. hawemakei.

he knew immediately that he knew tobacco. "pee nahe tai yaia yaro", e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to determine immediately what it is about, to find a solution quickly, to guess immediately what it is about. katitiprao.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

indicates that what is produced has something to do with a center or with the speaker (or with some of their very personal possessions), with fire, water, above or below. mapare.

to finish dirtying or staining something. shamipramai.

preparó una mascada. nahe ha tetareni.

mascada (wad of tobacco). tetareni.

bajaron al río para diseñar agua. rahara niyai mi re ithopariyowei.

bajaron al río para diseñar agua. ithopariyowei.

the forest smelled good. fnini tiweheo hi a ni kreterioma.

to smell good, to perfume. tiweheo.

I have no desire to go there. ya no hupimi.

to have no desire to go there. hupimi.

1. New leaf, bud still rolled up 2. Small cotton ball, cotton ball that has shrunk from use. ãkro.

the night surprised them, and the noises of the darkness were heard. yetu ke the pe he itututou ha yaironi, titiri pe heã kuprou shoarayoma.

to have closed (a basket) by joining the opposite edges and tying them together. itutupei.

son, do not sit with your legs spread apart. shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai.

to be seated. froo.

to progressively widen the walls of an object towards the edge while making it (canoe, vessel, basket, etc.). ehetamai.

when he recovers consciousness, he will start climbing again. a harou tehe a tuo kope.

to recover consciousness, to come to one. kope.

I pull the vines (to break them). thoo ya thotho ikokai.

to approach, to get close, to come near. ikokoprai.

a short time passed. yãhuyãhumai.

to pass a short time. yãhuyãhu.

to become scarce, to become depleted. resheshããi.

to dent, to produce a concave mark on the surface of an object (by bending, hitting or crushing it). wãhihãmai.

when all the machetes have been given, it is not possible to offer others. pe pe siparapi hititio yaio ke tehe, ai ke the no yeteopi mai.

to be added to. yetea.

come little one (son-in-law), you will lick my fingers (after I have harvested honey). hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape (mit.

to employ this kinship term to address someone younger than oneself, to be with someone in that kinship relationship. pusimou.

he got caught in the rain. he maapirayou.

to get caught in the rain. maapirayou.

younger sibling. heparaye.

a small recent vine hung where Rabipelado had taken refuge. nãro a re titia totihiawei ha, ihami thoo ke e thotho wai tuku re wariripeheriiwei.

to take refuge. wariripeheriiwei.

hurry up to build a scaffold. m athakari pe ta thai hairaruhe she.

hurry up. hairaruhe.

when I arrived, he was dead; they laid him down dead in a suspended hammock and the women carried him. no prewe a ha perimakiheni, suwe peni hiki tereherimahe.

they laid him down. tereherimahe.

fruits of the kãrã ãshi tree. kape kãrã ãshi kãrã ãshi.

to produce whirlpools in the water with one. kape.

to become smooth and moist (perfective of the inchoative). frakaharayou.

Bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

slightly curved, having a slightly curved shape. parokou.

I noticed that the peccaries had eaten the corn plants in the cultivated field. hikari theka hami kayuri peni yono mosi wai no thareshi.

in/towards the cultivated field. fhikari hami.

What laziness that one has. kurahe the wai ta mohihita.

What laziness he/she has!. mohihita.

Hewethawe died and his wife followed him in death. Hewethawe a nomai ha kuikuni, pe suwepi sho a no1 v.

A proper name. Hewethawe.

to name, to call. tathe.

to be dispersed in the forest in various camps. kasiprawe.

to be tied/closed in that manner (referring to a basket with opposite edges tied together). itutuprawe.

wasp (unidentified (animal, plant)). ihirãma.

the two women fled. suwe ke kipi shi wahi ayoherii.

as the woman was in love with him, she fled with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

1. fugitive woman who has abandoned her community and husband (to join a lover or stop being mistreated). 2. to flee, abandon one. shiwahi.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

buttocks, rear end, backside. kuamishi.

to build a scaffold. fmathakari thai.

scaffold. fmathakari.

and if I kept the gourd pressed against the ground. ya ãshi ta patetepou ta yaio sho.

calabash, gourd. shiãma.

to get dirty easily or continuously. shamitou.

approach the shore each one from a different place. pe ta hashirio rãikiomopotu.

to manifest in various different places. rãikou.

it was a short time before the turtle's (sick) head suddenly collapsed. poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to be hanging partially in the void; to be in balance, to be about to start hanging in the void (by sliding). reiprakei.

they make love (the two of them). ke kipi wamou.

to make love (said by a male speaker). yeriyerimo.

a type of parrot, Ara severa (Psittacidae). maracaná.

that's enough, it's over, it's finished. ih i re ke.

that. ihi re ke.

Siroromi skinned the man who was whimpering in vain from pain. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to whimper, cry out in pain. yomo.

we slowly stretched our necks to see. opisi ke yamaki oraki yarehou.

to raise the head, stretch the neck to see over something, raise the chin when walking in deep waters. yareheai.

that's what I believe. ya the nohi thapou tharei.

to believe, think, say something about someone (often in a ceremonial dialogue). thapouwehei.

he had so much sadness that he quickly returned to the region (inhabited by his parents). yetu the urihi aheteai re korãyouwei, puhipuhipeni.

sadness, grief; restlessness. puhipuhipeni.

to become invisible (by hiding). hitheprou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). mashaema.

as Mount Maiyo disappeared little by little under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear completely under water. shototokei.

the woman remained lying down, indifferent to what was happening. suwe ke the mohotiri peritaoma.

to remain lying down, indifferent. mohotiri.

while he was sitting still without moving, Yoawe (lit. wãrishewe ke a roa yãnikitou tehe, a mamo yeo tehe, suwe a tararema (mit. : the evil one) saw a woman. ).

to calm down, to become tranquil. yãnikitou.

when he had eaten all the bones produced by the cremation, Espíritu-luna moved along the ground in a crouching position. oshohore ke ki hititiarei yaro, periporiwe ke a pata hãmorimou ha shoaparuni.

all of them climbed, all ascended laboriously. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

to move along the ground, to crawl on the ground, to climb laboriously. hititiarei.

that. que.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (he has no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to go on a visit to another community. hamamouwei.

I'm going to hit you in the chest. pe pariki sheparei.

this morning, thorns (= a thorny object) fell on my head. misiki peni yare he sheparei kuroi.

to kill at the edge of the water; to hit someone in the chest or stomach; to fall on a dwelling or cultivated place (branch, tree); to fall on the head, to hit someone on the head; to let fall into the water; to crush by its weight. sheparei.

to paint on someone. hiporoshiai.

they hurried to shave the old woman's head, and then threw her into the water. patayoma the he shi hariwe hopaheni, a sheyepareihe.

old woman, important woman. patayoma.

to make thicker or denser. supram.

as Mount Maiyo disappeared little by little under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear gradually or little by little. shototai.

to predict that. nihita.

he wears a capuchin monkey tail around his head. wisha shina a yohopou.

to put something around one. yohorei.

The roasted banana whose burnt outer layer has been removed. Hãsikiã wake huu koporoma ã.

food whose burnt outer layer has been removed. hãsikiã.

that the demons of bitterness fall to the ground, since you want to make me kill. hei a pitha re praope, a koãmiri prerei ma yaio mapei ha, ware niya sheamai ta ayaoyo.

you want to make me kill. ayaoyo.

the snake eggs are clumped (form clusters). oru ke ki nathe shimokore.

to swell slightly (like the skin after an insect bite). shimokoreprou.

to partially roll up, to fold once (the edge of an object). wapure.

do not inhale those plants. peni wa thaprareihe.

inhale. thaprareihe.

it is a bird of prey that killed the two of them, in your absence. koikoimini ke kipi nohi porakaprai hearayou kuhe.

to kill two animals, to kill two enemies. porakaprai.

way. ikotihe.

that knows the guns. a no kopetapi re taope.

knows. kopetapi.

ant; Pheidole sp. (Hymenoptera: Myrmicinae). It is extremely aggressive.. shiriana.

to make a ball with an object to wrap it. pushuku.

he wants to kill me. hini yare niya prapoma.

to beat. aporrear.

he stays in the house and spends time sleeping. a mitao heatii.

to stay in the house and spend time sleeping. heatii.

to be occupied in different tasks. reshimai.

when the outsiders had finished eating the Yanomami, they threw their bones outside. nape peni yãnomãmi the waa ha hititireni, sipo ha the upe ripemahe.

when they had finished eating the Yanomami, they threw their bones outside. ripemahe.

they will not tell my son-in-law to do it, that another pulverize the calcined bones of the dead. ke wama a noﬁ yaipou mrai, shomi ke wamaki wãri ma kuini si ira ta kopeprarihe.

son-in-law. siyofraye.

(he) grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear off (the end of a long flexible object by pulling). uhetirema.

shook vigorously (perfective). he yomikirayou.

shake vigorously. he yomiki.

count with your fingers. imiki ta oweiku.

to enumerate, to count using the fingers. owe.

the dog bit me (once). hiimani yare si wetirema.

I will bite you several times. pe si wetirarei.

you will not bite his forehead. pei huko hami wa si wetiai mai (mit.

to bite once. wetirei.

to become less dense, to clear up (vegetation); to put order in what is crammed. wararaai.

I am better now, my state of health continues to improve little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to begin to fly (a bird), to improve after an illness, to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). ehetai.

to do evil things, to practice witchcraft (said especially during ceremonial dialogues). wãritiwe mi rakimai.

to do evil things, to practice witchcraft. rakimai.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise. yimirãimi.

to be tired (perfective aspect). motarayou.

to disappear suddenly in the middle of, to be swallowed up. ohoprakei.

1. octopus, 2. to become dusty, to get covered in dust, 3. to fill with dust, to let something get covered in dust (through negligence), 4. dusty. hekãhekã.

tree. ãmohi.

a rare and little-known animal, possibly a feline or a mythological being that is said to attack humans. huhu.

to lose one. moyepitou.

I will pass by here again when the sun is at that point in the sky. kiha mothoka ke a kutou tehe, ya hayua kopariyo.

look, when the sun is at that point, I will pass by here again. mamo ta shatiiku, eyeha the kutou tehe ya hayua kopariyo.

to pass, to go by. kopariyo.

río abajo, en el conuco, no hay realmente sino dos racimos cortos de plátanos. porakapi kuratha ke kipi wai onohowe yaua totihia kupiyekiri.

short, brief; briefly, to do something for a short time. onohoã.

to protest, to react to an unpleasant situation, to defend oneself during an altercation. wãriprai.

to be inferior, to be smaller than. hawea.

to give strength to a person (by feeding them well); to make harden. hiyakaamai.

1. state: seed of hisiomi in formation. 2. verb (intransitive): to be in the process of forming and growing (seed of hisiomi). shirepi.

to lie one next to another (elongated objects); to lie down next to each other (people). hohãthãkei.

he went back home when he had finished speaking. e kuu tehe a koã ha koruherini.

to return home, to go back home. koruheri.

what is it that burned there, in the place where the ground is covered (with leaves). kihi weti ke the rii yaoma the he re yohopiyei.

covered (by leaves). yohopiyei.

Translation:. kuhãwe natosi.

corn germ. natosi.

to be generous. noshi ihita.

to make a noise, to crackle. krãrikrãri.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

an object that others want to borrow, an object that is frequently borrowed. mahimamou.

he wants to fall into the hollow of the trunk. hii ka ha a keo puhio yaro.

Hooriwe has the habit of falling down. hooriwe ke pe keoprou.

to fall, to drop. keo.

mother-in-law. yapema.

to become barely perceptible to the senses (hearing, sight, taste). manashiray.

you (pl. wamaki motai totihiope.

when you (pl. yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope.

to get tired, to become fatigued. motai.

with a thin cord of the "whites", with this cord, I will strangle you. nape ke ãsithani, friyawa ke ani, pe orãmi shiãri.

unroll your fishing line, and catch the fish there. wa ãsitha ha kushereni, kihi waho ki re titirati, ki ta shaire.

thin cord or thread. ãsithani.

as the night was getting dark, he approached the woman. the mi ka ha komãtaaruni suwe ke iha a ikuoma.

to get dark (night falling). komãtaaruni.

don't we have the intention of organizing a funeral ceremony. pemaki iyaprope ma re kui.

to organize a funeral ceremony. iyaprope.

his wife picked a tender leaf of the wapu kohi tree. pe suwepini wapu re e kohi hena tuku hukerema.

leaf. suwepini.

my eyes turned red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

to redden; to ripen. wakei.

to have one. onimou.

to become infested with worms. moshapiprou.

to soften (the ground), to become muddy (durative). kawehai.

the wind makes the palm leaves buzz. masiko ke ki shiririmou.

to buzz, to hum. shiririmou.

to refuse to accept a gift, an object, a portion of food. waii.

to refuse, reject, decline. waii.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. nowã tha.

I was stringing beads. tope ya ki hiima.

strung beads. hii no.

I strung beads. hiirema.

they felt then a great concern (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to be worried/concerned about someone (terminative aspect). haruhuprou.

to line up. wirinaãi.

to lower (something that is too high). yahatotai.

to have kneaded the cassava flour so that it has some liquid inside. urererayou.

Centipede carved. yakekerarema.

to be locally reddened by the action of the sun (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). heteterayou.

to have a desire to vomit. suhahawe.

speak of river upstream. eﬁere el ocumo.

speak. eﬁere.

a family of plants including the custard apple and soursop. nonaceae.

to smoke (in form of). weheroai.

arrow with a harpoon point. fãtãri ãhi pehitho.

arrow with a harpoon point. fãtãri.

to have a slightly reddish color, to have reddish reflections (locally). wahehai.

the knots that tie the vines of my mother-in-law's hammock. yape thooye thoku he ihewe no kiriwe (mit.

mother-in-law. rse.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

to tie, to bind, to fasten with a very tight knot or loop. prohohoprou.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to divide, separate, fracture, split into parts. sheteka.

to step on the floor of the house, to visit a particular community. fyãno kapai.

to develop a new bark after losing the old one (tree). sikãrãyou.

to put green, to paint green. riyeamai.

all see, the night demon passes again. pe haikia.

to see. haikia.

to kick, to stomp on. kaisa.

to place oneself in the center of a group of people, to stand in the middle of the water. tharipariyo.

to mix (people, objects). nikerekei.

I pulverize/grind this (alucinogenic substance). ya e pe hishi ha thaprani.

to pulverize, to grind into powder. thaprani.

I have itching on my lip. ya kasiki shihitikema.

to have itching (experience itching in a precise location). shihitiai.

1. to wear out a little, 2. worn out. ruroho.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are crowded together there, pressing tightly against each other. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

to crowd together, to press tightly against each other. nakoari.

they placed mapires full of wapu fruits on the ground. wapu ke pe ithãun diamahe, yorehi pe ha.

to descend, to go down. ithãun.

ambos continuaban sacudiéndole las ramas desprovistas de frutos. proke e the hiki ha ripukuatarani.

sacudiéndole las ramas desprovistas de frutos. ripukuatarani.

we shot arrows at them and they cried: "hokiã. the ha niyakini : "hokiã. hokiã. hokiã. ". ", e pe kuma.

cry of alarm. hokiã.

I make the clothes dry. iro ya siki washimai.

to make a wet object dry, to dry an animal skin. washimai.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to spread out, space out, disseminate. shororai.

Baba mantenía el fuego dentro de su boca (para esconderlo). iwariweni a wake hopoma.

el chamán escupió la planta (de la cual nació) un jaguar. hekurani ira hena hoprarema.

to vomit. weipou.

the Shãshãpiwei mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

to be painted or striped with vertical lines. sherorowe.

I really have the urge to defecate. ya shi ihe totihiwe ma ta yaitani.

to have the urge to defecate. shi.

they were damaged/deteriorated/ruined (perfective aspect). wãritirayoma.

Cook the cassava and give it to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to give food to someone. yamai.

broken into several pieces (plural object). hatakarariyo.

to become mature (referring to cambur fruits). mothoai.

I'm going with the others to get water. mãu ya u ta ishakomai nareo sho.

the entire vine forms a hook. thoo thotho ishakowe.

to bend, to curve, to form a hook. hakoai.

to go ahead, to lead the way. ora-tou.

to stretch, to extend. ikoko.

the man was in the middle of many termites that were piled up inside the hammocks hung close together. osheri ke pe yayomope hami yãnomãmi ke the re nikerepariyonowei.

to be piled up on top of each other in a dwelling. yayomou.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

wrinkled, creased. rukuruprou.

when it thunders loudly, one jumps in fright. ikãri yãru a wã hai tehe the pe kiriapramai.

to make someone jump in fright, to startle someone. iriaprai.

to start tearing apart, to start shredding. rehihiprai.

I will obtain (a hammock) in exchange for this object. ei the ki ha ya ki ruruape.

to obtain (an object) in exchange, to trade. ruruape.

roof of woven palm leaves of the collective dwelling (shapono). sope.

to adopt a form. toroheai.

give them food (ceremonial dialogue). ke ki ni ta hikãhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to feed a very young child by chewing food and giving it mouth-to-mouth; to feed in the mouth (jokingly, during a ceremonial speech). hikããi.

to place in a hammock (an object, a person). erimakei.

edible fruit of the kãyuweshirimi hi shrub. kãyuweshirimi.

to become numb. harihiai.

rope, cord. kapuya.

the noise is moving away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to diminish gradually (noise, voice). nashirayou.

the vulture glides. watupa a reraai.

to glide, to soar. reraai.

1. Acquire a floury consistency (a food). 2. Dry out inside (wood). kakashiai.

he has had a fixed gaze for a while. a mamoku royokotio.

the stars do not twinkle. shitikari pe mamoku pata royokoprawe.

to have a fixed gaze. royokotio.

when he had eaten all the bones produced by the cremation, Espíritu-luna crawled away. oshohore ke ki hititiarei yaro, periporiwe ke a pata hãmorimou ha shoaparuni.

all of them climbed, all ascended with difficulty. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

to move by crawling or dragging oneself on the ground; to climb with difficulty. hãmorimou.

when the speaker is in the house. wakarapei.

to search for crabs (upriver dialect). okonarimi.

the hekura shot arrows against the daughter of the y a w a r i. taritari ke peni yãwãriyoma pe teepi a niyamahe.

they shot arrows. teepi.

to happen repeatedly, to repeat. notiai.

he has just entered the armadillo's burrow. opo pekapi ha a rukerihe.

he has just entered. rukerihe.

to be slightly tense. karerehe.

she tried to put out the fire by urinating on it at the moment it was stolen from her husband. prouhuai.

1. to rush, to precipitate 2. to plant, to sow, to transplant in a small area. prouhuai.

to separate, to divide for a moment. sheteketou.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cacao plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma.

to take refuge. ruoma.

when one possesses arrows, like us, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

we collected canes to make arrows. shereka yama he pe teararema.

arrow, shaft of an arrow. shereka.

clearing on the riverbank, open space on the riverbank. fu ka yakea.

clearing of vegetation at the water's edge, place where one can easily land. fu noka wawea.

clearing, open space. yakere.

to stand on tiptoe. hiteshek.

the cat moves while extending its claws. mishi imisiki kushesheaprarai.

it moves while extending its claws. kushesheaprarai.

specific sound of a fart, expressed by the onomatopoeia ã f u. fshiã efumou.

to feel like farting. fshiã ihe.

fart that prolongs emitting a more or less high-pitched sound. fshiã kiyomou.

sound of a fart when the buttocks are wet. fshiã praririmou.

short and dry fart like a tongue click. fshiã tahamou.

fart. fshiã.

"let's confront each other with sticks". "yamaki ta wapayo".

to measure oneself, to confront with sticks or clubs. wapayou.

to have hunger, to be hungry. toticomer.

the pasarela sank under the water when I crossed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to submerge momentarily under water. paotou.

the turtle was approaching, moving in an oscillating manner. poshotomi ke a wai paroparomoimama.

to move in an oscillating, swaying manner, like turtles. paroparomo.

I will go later, I am waiting for the sun to come out (from behind the clouds). waiha ya hupe, mothoka ya homoãmai pario.

to wait for the sun to come out from behind clouds or fog. homoãmai.

en el conuco hay muchos racimos de plátanos (colgando de las plantas). hikari theka hami kuratha a perikiwe.

colgados en gran número (como personas en chorros). periki.

to cover something completely. popohoprou.

his younger brother, who has the habit of going there to visit, was the one who spoke to them. pe oshe, mihami a re huuwei, pe the pe ã keama ha tharei.

to make an important statement, to inform of a serious event; to make a request (for a good, a favor). keayou.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while observing the surroundings (when an attack is feared). kohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; for birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. yãpreke.

I am the song of the Yoreshiãriwe Spirit that passes before you. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope ye.

I already spoke with the women, I told them: "cry for the dead", I asked them to cry for the dead. suwe ya pe nowã thaa waikirei kuhe, "pe ta ãmoãmo, pe ta heri".

to sing, to hum; euphemistically: to cry for the dead. ãmoãmo.

the people of tayari theri shot many arrows from far away. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikãihe.

long, tall (for humans). frapa.

formed. omi: formó.

formed. omi.

that is what we intend to do and that is the reason why we leave you here. ei naha re pe niya ha thapramani, pusi pe thapi heipou ma re kui.

to leave someone/something behind, to abandon on the way. thapramani.

the smoke (of the cigarette) is swallowed easily. the wake shi suhao totihit a w e.

to swallow. suhao.

I didn't watch where the arrow went. shereka ya no taanomi.

to observe, to watch, to follow with the gaze. taanomi.

the spotted-faced cat. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

to be spotted or mottled locally. hayapishia.

to make war. yahatu.

to be little fleshy (a fruit). fyãhihiwe.

bejuco masimasi. ãhuku.

to urinate. eye.

he listens. he aharai.

to listen, to lend an ear. aharai.

to tell others. wã maihi.

to tell others. maihi.

to be full, to be satiated. potehai.

when you achieve clarity, content yourself with threatening (without acting, out of cowardice). wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

represent clearly, recall vividly. wararaparu.

he feels bad. he opikewemi.

to feel bad. opike.

to open, to split, to break partially. akatahuai.

I feel hot (lit: the heat comes out of me). ya yopri hai.

the turtle's legs emerged (from the shell). poshotomi pe mamiki wai harariyoma.

to pass, to enter, to exit. hai.

the cambures (fruits) are crushed under the weight. tate ke ki nahihou.

to crumble, to fall apart, to break into pieces. kohihi.

to feel unwell. tharehou.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than (plural object). hawehemakei.

no matter how much I asked for goods, he did not respond favorably to my request. matohi ya pe nakama ma kui, a wã huonom i.

they do not respond (or: they do not want to give it). pe the pe ã huomi ke.

respond (to a question, to a call); respond favorably to a request. wã huo.

to sharpen a point. hitoto.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their heads in the water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

putting the head in the water. kaoayoma.

little does it matter that he comes with the intention of throwing a magic substance at me stealthily. yare niya ma hãthomai tehe, enaha ware thapou ta petao.

to approach stealthily a person (to throw a magic substance at them). fãtho.

to be, to exist. wemi.

while the members of my community stay to kill the enemy effigy, I go ahead walking in company of the others. kamiye yamakini iha no owe a shei hoohe nareo tehe ya paria narerayoherima.

I go ahead walking in company of others. narerayoherima.

to erode, to crumble gradually by action of water; to nibble, to partially crush something with the incisors. washishiai.

the raw caterpillars were (arranged) above, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached the bottom (of the package). heaka ha kasha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to fill up to the brim, to reach a certain limit (object). manikiprawe.

to become deformed, to twist. koheheãi.

I make. mi nonoho.

to make. nonoho.

they turned around and had barely started to move away when the little frog turned into a jaguar. the pe humapi rea payekeprou tehe wawa hena ira kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to place something at a good distance, neither too far nor too close. payeketou.

Plural form of pisiri. rihuuku pisiri.

Mythological example using pisiri/rihuupi to refer to a blowgun. ira a naikiripi taema ma kui, a tapralrihu ke a ha tikene, lo buscó sin encontrarlo; a hushuoripi mohe.

1. Supernatural plant whose stem is hollow and has transverse partitions like bamboo. Fierce wasps live next to this plant. The hekura and yawari cut them for use. The hekura have them in their throats and through them they spit beads (tope) and magical substances. 2. In mythological stories, it designates a blowgun or a more or less long pipe with which magical substances are blown at adversaries.. pisiri.

I imitated the call of the gallineta bird, and it responded immediately. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

I imitated (something) and it responded immediately. nokaprariyoma.

to shout in a certain way: . hoohoomou.

they were left adrift on the flood current. motu ke uni the pe kareprou ha kurarei (mit.

to float, to drift. karerayou.

we who will go (he and I). kamiye pehekini pehe a niyapraama.

we two are dirty (he and I). kamiye yaheki shapehekini pehe pe niyapraama.

both, the two (of us). niyapraama.

spinal column. humothoku.

dust, powder. mrakamraka.

extend one's arms towards a loved one. imiki poshoko.

extend one. poshoko.

then we climbed the slope, and when we had stopped at the top (of the mountain), the wind suddenly ceased. yamaki yãmoã ha mahitaikuhuruni, hesika ha yamaki uprahatou tehe watori a matha kãi re waitariyowei.

we stopped for a good while at the top (of the mountain). ahataoma.

Bark was added to the colorant to perfume it, that's why it's shining. fei nana pe e no kapino, e no kapino fa totiﬁoni, ei re e noshi tererewe.

brilliant, shining, resplendent. terere.

when dawn broke, he quickly withdrew his penis (from the woman he was making love to). the uheheprou tehe the moroshi uketareiwei.

to approach/come near quickly. uketareiwei.

it becomes moldy. mishi rutheai.

it has become moldy. mishi rutherariyo.

to become moldy. mishi ruthe.

speech from upriver. pakatapi.

as Macagua was angry, they retraced their steps. prereimariwe ke a hushuo the no wã ha, pe e he tatopariyoma.

to go back, to retrace one. prer.

the dead were many, but he made them be reborn (lit: he made their breaths come out again). yãnomãmi pruka pe nomawe ma kui, pe mishiãki hamai kooma.

to make exit or enter, to give birth, to make sprout. hapramai.

he gave ripe plantains to some and others. kuratha re ke ki wake hipea ha shetekeapotuni.

to give parts of something to different people. shetekeapotuni.

immobilize an animal by pressing it with the foot. katikipou.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihiãi.

He/she does not exist and also it can be The word 'peti' in Yanomami means 'black fly, simuliid'. Peti amo.

It is found mainly upstream in watercourses and mountainous regions. Se lo encuentra sobre todo río arriba en los cursos de agua y en las regiones montañosas.

to fill. peti.

to be scattered on the ground in large quantities (wild fruits). pororowe.

I go to your house (towards you). kahe ke iha ya huu.

It is to you that I speak. kahe ke iha ya wã hai.

to, towards, in the direction of. iha.

the inside of the canoe is slippery. kanawa a mi takre.

to be slippery inside. takre.

he cut the baby's umbilical cord and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

when dawn broke, he quickly withdrew his penis (from the woman he was making love to). the uheheprou tehe the moroshi uketareiwei.

immediately, instantly, without delay. shoatareiwe.

each will spread them out again. pe the patherio koope ke.

spread out. patherio.

they shot numerous arrows and it made a thohuthohumou sound as they fell. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

it made a thohuthohumou sound. niyaakiheni.

Õmawe and Yoawe appeared, and the monos capuchinos got angry. omawe ke kipi ha petariyoni, hoashiri pe hushutariyoma.

appeared. petariyoni.

I crumble corn. yono ya mope hushishai.

to start crumbling or pulverizing with the fingers. hushishiprai.

go there (you two) to prepare seje drink. hoko mãu pe ta yarupikutu.

come (both of you) to drink here. the ta koapiyo.

they (two). pi.

forest that is not inhabited. e naha ke pe ã shodo, selva que no está habitada.

not having been touched yet; not having been done yet. shomão.

the sun advances, it approaches the horizon. kihi mothoka kuaai kure, pe the hiririwe ke, pe the hirirou totihia ke a kure.

to approach the horizon (celestial body). hiririãi.

Carpintero enano se hinchó y la plataforma (sobre la cual estaba colocado el cadáver) se distendió. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini, hii hiki noshi hariraama.

1. to bray, to scream; 2. to swell, to distend, to dilate. nosiye.

to cause. poteteamai.

you have to do like the Shamathari. shamathari wa pe ha owemani.

to imitate, to do like. owemani.

he was in his hammock and was swinging himself with his foot while whistling. the husi heã wãri kayerikayerimou yaioma.

to swing/rock each other by pushing with the foot while in hammocks. kayerimayou.

(related word, no clear translation provided). mamisi preinama.

I'm going to make love. ya shi kreo.

to make love (humorous). kreo.

they got angry. wã rahuhou.

to get angry, to become enraged. raye.

both crabs are side by side (in the same hole). oko ke kipi hãkohoã.

to be juxtaposed, to be side by side (round objects); to be two in the same hammock. hãkohoã.

the earth is smooth. mashitha a si kopehewe.

to smooth; to homogenize a liquid or cambur compote by reducing all solid parts. kopehamai.

to cause an erection. yorumai.

ya reconocí la planta de los yawari. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena noihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a noihipia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo noihipia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. pia.

He is carrying a load. i una carga pashokai.

to carry a load. pashokai.

a type of vine; Tynnanthus polyanthus (Bignoniaceae). hayahayama.

to have the voice beginning to change. wã paruripiai.

to have a changing voice (adolescent). paruripi.

to fall asleep. puhi mramai.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age) and also it can be The word 'thai' in Yanomami means 'make, do, carry out'. eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

What are you all doing. weti ke wama the rii thai.

kill. thai.

then, what is happening to them (where they are). weti naha pei wamaki kuaai kupiyewe.

to be in a certain state in a place different from the place of utterance. kupiyewe.

to start cutting in a circular manner, removing the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimoneneprai.

the small stream becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to narrow, to close off, not allowing passage (a stream, a path). horokou.

to vomit. kamishi yoruu.

to vomit, to throw up. yoru.

to stretch out (a line). yashokoai.

they put me in a hammock hung from a pole and transported me like that. yare hiki re tereh e r i i w e i.

to put a sick person in a hammock hung from a pole and transport them by holding the ends of the pole. hiki te.

to tear into shreds, to shred. rehihiprou.

las hojas del árbol wakata gritan como las marimondas. wakata henaki re pashomorãkiri.

gritan como las marimondas. pashomorãkiri.

I have searched them from one place to another. ya pe taeatarama.

I have searched from one place to another. taeatarama.

plant; Heliconia sp. (Musaceae). The new tender shoots are eaten.. yatitawe.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

to approach (a goal). aheteprariyo.

they were not upset, they did not argue, they were well. pe hushuonomi, pe hiranomi, the pe topratioma.

to scold, argue, rebuke; to curse. hiranomi.

to drool under the effect of a hallucinogen. fkahu upe hai.

to salivate. fkahu upe suhao.

saliva, drool, spit. fkahu.

bajaron al río para diseñar agua. rahara niyai mi re ithopariyowei.

bajaron al río para diseñar agua. ithopariyowei.

I clearly heard in a dream the song of the birds raromi konaki. raromi konari ke kipi ã mahariri ha topraikukirini (cha.

the song of the birds raromi konaki. topraikukirini.

I will come visit (lit. ya huko pe yororowe waehetariyo.

to enter a dwelling unexpectedly, to appear suddenly. waehetou.

to carve by striking precise blows with a sharp instrument (machete, knife). thaprai.

(speech from upriver). ãtushi.

on the path, he wants to embed it on a rock. pei ke maki ha e the shatimai puhioherii yaro.

to embed, to stick into. shatimai.

to become hardened, deformed by heat. torekeai.

when the belly of the woman exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

object long cut in several pieces. tipura.

(the branches of) the horoeti trees break easily. horoeti hipe kreyou si ihehewe.

to break easily (said of fragile branches and certain trees). kreyou.

to be locally cracked or split open. thepahai.

I tore it (by hitting it, striking it). hihu ya u na tihekikema.

to hit, strike, collide. tihekii.

to be a little yellow. ffrãrãhã.

to bend, to twist. koheheprou.

to become smooth, to smooth out. frakah.

extender, estirar un dedo. fi mihena kashesheai.

doblar un dedo. fi mihena shãkoãi.

finger. mamihena.

to make boil (perfective). yorumarei.

round, spherical. coco.

los Hombres enfermos tienen la mirada fija y en sus ojos pululan los gusanos. yea ha peoni, pei re the mamo hami mosha re pe pata torereprarou.

pululan los gusanos. torereprarou.

she is my mother, I call her mother. naye ke a, kama ke iha ya napemou.

mother. nape.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

to be about to gather, group, assemble. kokãprai.

I say it frankly to you in turn: it is because you are afraid that you always oppose (our decisions). ya kuu wawetoo mi hetuo re, wa ha kirini wa wã shiro remotii ma re kui.

to say frankly, to declare without ambiguity. wawetoo.

unfortunately they ritually wrestled in the middle of the central plaza. the pe yãimou mi ãmo re tikooherinowe.

to ritually wrestle during an alliance feast. yãimou.

when they were close, they gathered to bathe. pe oweai tehe pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma.

bathe. hiraoma.

to smooth, to polish (multiple objects). tãihãmai.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

to compress, crush, press against the ground, keep an object in place by applying pressure with the hand or placing a weight on top. hikiãi.

to have defecated (perfective). thopohorayou.

to soil something several times in a row. shamitaai.

to become lukewarm. pothothoai.

to be born, to grow (a plant). kau.

when the plantains reached maturity he said: "go kill game animals for me". kuratha e pe hãmoprou tehe a wã hai shoaom a: "yaroye ke a ta thahe".

to have matured, to have reached maturity. hãmorayou.

Its succulent roots are edible. Pl.

plant cultivated, lairén; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). kumama.

I am afraid. motuã ãhi.

to be afraid. motuã.

He defended himself (speaking). Nakre wã no huo.

to defend oneself (speaking). nakre.

both resurrected without anyone's help. yãmi ke kipi horiprariyoma (mit.

he immediately made the call to the hekura (and said): "I make my dog resurrect". a tutomou shoaoma: "ipa yaro ya horiprai ta kuparu" (mit.

to revive, to heal, to make resurrect (after a shamanic healing). horiprai.

they (two) found on the ground a cooked caterpillar and picked it up. kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepireiwei.

they (two) found on the ground and picked up. hokepireiwei.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, to break or grab. yãmonimai.

Quickly Tuqueque broke the beehive, let the pieces fall, then slid down the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to harvest honey by breaking the beehive into pieces. fpuu poprai o oi poprai.

to break, cut into pieces (a beehive). poprarini.

ellos cosechan hojas de caña de la India partiéndolas con los dedos. komishi henape yeriihe.

recolectar, arrancar partiendo con los dedos, recoger hojas de tabaco de esa manera. yeriihe.

to those people there, they want to kill them (lit. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

to skin the crest and neck of a bird (paují). yoaheni.

they immediately place the sticks in a line. hiki ithãã shaniniwe ta shoararihe she.

to be in a line, to be completely aligned. shaniniwe.

to arrive after others. fkoã.

terminative of . hoteprou.

he transported the large stone again on his shoulder. maa ke ma pata yarukepou kooma.

1. To carry, transport on the shoulder. 2. To maintain compression. yarukepou.

his arrows always hit the target. a yaketoi mi.

to never miss a shot. yaketou.

to have been harvested by cutting into pieces. pahetima.

to become beautiful. riyehai.

I have the habit of entering (tree trunks) to eat my. kamiye pei ke ya ha rukeoproherini, puu ya u pe waaprai tharei.

to have the habit of entering/penetrating. rukeoprou.

Rabipelado estaba lejos desde hacía tiempo cuando pensó: "¿y si volara. nãroriwe ke a payeketao waikio tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

if volara. perayou.

you know very well that it (the tobacco) does not dry fast. the pe kãi ma re heprao haio mai: sabes muy bien que no se seca rápido (el tabaco).

dry. seca.

broke, crushed (plural objects, perfective aspect). karesheakei.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. hirotoimi.

the (cut) head was moving and came to rub against the leg. pei ke heni matha hurii kuaai ha yaioni.

I was going to reach him quickly. rope ya pe nosi hurirema.

to rub against something, to pursue and reach someone/something. hurikei.

he arrived home carrying the woman on his back. yãnomãmi ke the suwe ha yehireherini a kãi kopema.

come on, kill me (lit: come on, carry me on your back). pei, yare ta yehireheri.

to carry on one. yehireheri.

to wait for edible caterpillars to fatten before collecting them. ãyoparami.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they then lived downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

to describe a curve while moving (perfective form). tihiyerayou.

to be affected by a supernatural being or a malefic substance. yokekeprou.

container that. kahumou.

to bend or curve the tip of an object in several places. toyekeakei.

they put the váquiros to cook. ware pe hariaihe.

they put to cook. hariaihe.

to become completely rough, rugose, granular. erererayou.

the day soon returned to how it was before. yetu ha the mi uhehetou mi yaparayoma.

to rise again (the day). uhehetou.

despiojar a una persona pasándole un peine por el pelo. ayakekai.

I have a premonition that my stomach will hurt again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

I have a premonition. kokepi.

why did you let the fish swell on your return. weti te ha wa yuripi hoã ishiprohorou tarei.

to make swell, inflate something. proprokoamai.

brother, put this on your shoulder. ãi, ei the ta rukere, the ta yerere.

to put on one. yererei.

tree (unidentified). usihi.

the turtle was approaching walking in an oscillating manner. poshotomi ke a wai paroparomoimama.

walking in an oscillating manner, like turtles swaying as they move. paroparomoimama.

she weaves baskets. apia ke hi hore.

to weave. hore-.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it (perfective, plural object). tikukurarei.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

to stagger, to totter. totihiohe.

to give false news. nomohori.

Õmawe advanced crouched (so as not to be seen), and crouched down. Õmawe a ha teretereikuni, a yerekema.

the place where the monster was crouched. ihiru pei koroku ha ha kema.

to crouch, to squat, to lie down, to be in a crouched position. rekema.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not endure such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to shoot arrows at each other. yoayou.

there are lightning flashes. the mi yãmimou.

to occur once (lightning). yãmitou.

to be clear, limpid, translucent, white. herushia.

he brought her nipple close (and said): "Soon, bite my nipple. pei hãkãmi totoo piyeoma: "yare hãkãmi ta wetipraa".

bite me. wetipraa.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the tapirs scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

disperse (and make parallel rows). pe mi ta yoããheri.

to scatter, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoo.

now the enemies have approached (lit. re ahetepraruhe.

I was under the influence of hallucinogens in the early morning. re henaopoi (cha. and also it can be The word 're' in Yanomami means 'to'. ): en la mañanita estuve bajo la inﬂuencia de alucinógenos.

he will go to the forest and also it can be The word 're' in Yanomami means 'a/an'. hei ai yoka re horere.

went to the place where and also it can be The word 're' in Yanomami means 'the'. re uprayahi ha.

now. re.

to be afraid. kosiparinama.

older brother, put this on your shoulder, lift it. ãi, ei ke the ta rukere, the ta yerere.

to hook, to hang in balance, to place on the shoulder or around the neck. rukeai.

to have been piled up, to have been heaped up. eruyutua.

as Mount Maiyo was disappearing little by little under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear for a moment under water. shotototou.

lie in the hammock, the fish that swim in the water, without any objection, cut for me with their teeth (something to grab them) (= give me fishing line). wa mi ha yaithoni, hei ke ki re shurirorati, wamaki ã hai mai ke ki ta wetiki.

1. To turn one. yaithoo.

flap wings without flying (a bird). yathethai.

to have a foot that resists the penetration of a sharp object. toukuprou.

he inverted the bamboo tips on the arrow shafts. rahaka ke ki posi nomihãma.

to invert, to turn over. nomihãma.

when you want to drink, enroll a leaf in the shape of a funnel (to collect water) (advice from a shaman to a young initiate). mãu re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokoreni.

to enroll a leaf in the shape of a funnel (to collect water). oshokoreni.

he got angry and left, abandoning the banana plants. a fa huoshuoni siki taa fa shoakeferini.

I left leaving an arrow in the house, which the women broke in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

to abandon, to leave something or someone in a place, to leave alone. huoshuoni.

to be firmly tied, to be tied by a very tight rope. prohororoa.

the grease makes (one) feel like vomiting. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to feel nauseous, to feel like vomiting. harihai.

possessions provoke envy. matohi pe ha the pe puhi waiamai.

Bat desired her pubic hair (lit. pei weshi pe ha heweriwe a puhi waioma (mit. : Bat coveted the pubic hair). ).

to desire, to covet, to envy. waio.

to grow, to rise. tireprou.

ha. he. ha. he.

ha. he.

give me a bamboo tip, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to surpass, to be beyond a certain limit or place. torehe.

ay, our voices slip (= sink) under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

to slip, slide, sink. tikoaheria.

resulta ahora que, mientras caminaban, hincaron la piedra grande perpendicularmente (en el suelo). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe (mit.

they hincaron (hincaron perpendicularmente) la piedra grande. pemakeherimahe.

the stream is sinuous. ushipiri shãkokowe.

to be folded multiple times on itself (object); to be sinuous, to have numerous meanders (streams of water). shãkokowe.

it is far away. puhi no prahapi.

distant, far away. prahapi.

to pluck the feathers of. mi hukukuai.

to look at with mamo tete. mamo repoo.

to look at with. repoo.

to get distracted, to let one. mohotutou.

I placed sticks under the ugly buttocks of the (unborn) child, and Rumirumiyoma wove a basket to enclose it (= I killed the fetus in the mother's womb). kana ke hiki ha ihiru ya posi wãritiwe romaparei kurei, rumirumiyoma ihiru pei ke a pesi ha tiyeaprani (cha.

associated with cloudy weather and rain; she is the mother-in-law of Titiri, the demon of the night. tiyeaprani.

they gathered banana leaves. maiyo keki ha kuratha si pe hirapraai yaiomahe (mit.

to keep objects grouped together. hiraprou.

trees (plural). mohiki.

to lift an empanada. ãrãnã ãreke.

to lift, to raise. ãreke.

to make one's mouth water. kahu upe sahurayou.

to make one. sahurayou.

el hambre me atormenta y me pregunto qué hacer, ni siquiera tengo ocumo para cocinar. ohi pe wayu ha ya puhi wetinahamou yaro, ohina ya moku tuai ma marani.

ocumo. oﬁna.

oh father of mine, appear (lament). hapemi a ta petaru.

father, brother of the father, husband of the paternal aunt. hapemi.

mientras el loro estaba encaramado, mientras estaba en la punta de su palo. werehi a ma roo tehe, a ma hiio tehe.

encarama al loro. werehi a ta romaki.

loro real; Amazona ochrocephala (Psittacidae). werehi.

I do not go to the mountainous regions (lit. hehu keki uprao hami pei re ya torekoimi yaiwe.

I do not climb. torekoimi.

the avocado tree flowered for the first time. ãhãi ke hi hapamou.

that which happens for the first time and will continue happening regularly; a tree that bears fruit for the first time. hapamou.

he went to a region that was not his and the consequences were disastrous, that brought him misery. shomi ke the urihi hami a no wãri ha preroherini pe the no wãri shi hiroprarou ha kurai.

to bring misfortune, to cause misery. preroherini.

I trace a line with onoto across my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to have had oneself painted with a curved line going from one ear to the other across the forehead. tiwaromokei.

The new sprout has grown. Puhutu prou wakexi.

new sprout, new branch. puhutu.

the dog was named Tokorinawe, it was very big. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

having the name Tokorinawe. tokorinawe.

I met them (in the sky, in the land of souls). ya kuo nareopeherayou kuhe.

in a different place from the one stated. vhvrayo.

he lay down after having finished cutting firewood. koã ãsho pe ha waikani a perikema.

to finish, to complete a task. waikani.

it was he who took her as a wife and deflowered her. ihini a ha tereni eyoshi ka thakei no kureshi.

vagina (jokingly). feyoshi.

to clear. noshi wãwe.

branches emerging (plural objects, dispersed). shorokoprawe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). toshomo.

if you provoke my anger, you will lose. kamiye ke ware hushuo ha shurukuruni, pe no premakei.

to provoke someone. shurukou.

I have the impression that there is a lot of honey in that nest. puu a no no nihio re totihiopiwe.

to have the impression that there is a great quantity of something. totihiopiwe.

to be full of moisture (wood), object damaged by moisture and decomposition. ruthe.

headdress of the hekura made with the braided down of birds of prey. watoshe koimari.

many paujíes (birds) flew away, they were not at all wild. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma, mohoti totih i w e.

to make fly, to cause to fly. yepramai.

I just stole banana plants. kuratha ya siki kararu thomiã re ayarekirihe.

to steal an object to give it to someone. thomikei.

sole of the foot. mamiki pariki.

heel. mamiki teshina.

foot. mamiki.

to pulse, to beat regularly (like a heart); to feel stings. yokoyokomo-.

to frequently miss the target. sinamou.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

to strangle. shiãrei.

object whose edge has been folded several times on itself. koherãrei.

to satisfy someone, to give a lot of food to a guest. makasi yaheteamai.

some reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

they reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). iheteaharayou.

she really could not fall asleep. a mio shihihirio yaioma.

not being able to fall asleep, having a restless night. hihirio.

he is there. yotho natho hi.

to be. yotho.

and here they are, arriving one after another, coming to live in my chest. wa ki kuorani, wa ki peripraai ta kuparuhani.

arriving one after another. peripraai.

to get dark, night falls. weya.

to become lumpy. komokotoreãi.

they died. nomarariyo.

to slap repeatedly, to slap several times. paii.

to dig a shallow hole. maketiamai.

how abundant the tapir tracks could be. are pe mãyo heherama.

to exaggerate, to boast (about one. heherama.

to make dry; to protect from rain. wehetimamai.

the jaguar had cut the dog's head off. hiima irani ke a he wetiprama.

to cut in two. wetiprai.

estrecharse, apretarse; estar invadido por la vegetación. wãkere.

He looked exactly like his own father. pe foo the kuope naha foo a kuoma.

father, elder male relative in direct line. Foo.

to be separated; to constitute two residential groups. pashihiwe.

I am a crown with the appearance of a harpy eagle and I pass before you. watoshe mohomi ya hayuai e.

harpy eagle. watoshe mohomi.

1. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tiresha.

to fabricate a slightly longer arrow than usual. tirehekei.

1. to break, split or crack (something long and rigid like a stick or bone) by striking one end against something hard; 2. something long and rigid that has been broken in that way. yatiki.

I waited for the paují to perch before shooting it with an arrow. paruri ya ha romakini ya niyaprarema.

to wait for a bird to perch (before shooting it with an arrow). romakini.

I'm not approaching, I'm going to live in the forest. ya aheteomi, wãyumi ke ya ayou.

to go live in the forest. wã-.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

Guianan toucanet (bird species). aoaomi.

to have the stomach swollen, hard and painful. ipreterayou.

large worm. heresima.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood upright, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

to be standing close together, to be upright against each other (rocks). shirikiwe.

to dance in the central plaza during a festival with another community, to participate in a presentation dance. shuwahimo.

I am in a period of scarcity (lit. ya no ohea ke a kure.

to be in a period of scarcity, to lack food. ohea.

to have that shape completely. wapokowe.

I am afraid. hiihami mohi.

to be afraid. hiihami.

to bend, to fold. hithothe.

guijarro, piedrita, fragmento de roca. remakashi.

I take beads (I take a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to take, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãoãrãrei.

to bend or fold it. he itutu.

to become numerous (perfective). yahararayou.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. nowã tha.

the women went there to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. hurohuro.

to have a desire to vomit. suhahaai.

to find a place again without hesitation. katitipraai.

it. tepepraai.

to have struck with the paw during a fight (a bird). kakekerei.

to go around. kayerikayeri.

(he/she/it) takes a shortcut. he tiheri.

to take a shortcut. tiheriai.

the demon of the night gave names to the places of the forest. titirini urihi ke ki ãhã weyei kupariyoma.

1. Promise. 2. Assign. weyekei.

to be located at the front of a canoe to steer it. ora-pou.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei.

was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. harukuaprarou.

ithãwe, disp. ithãwe, disp. , pl. , pl. obj. obj. V. V. ni ithã, pesi ithã: they descended. ni ithã, pesi ithã.

descended. descendieron.

in an instant we painted our faces black and over that background, we traced sinuous lines with our fingernails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to have lines traced on one. tikekamou.

to cry for a child. puhi kãi hãkihiãi.

to cry for someone. hãkihiãi.

to cut the end of a long object (applying a downward blow with a sharp object). tihetiai.

we quickly reached land one after the other. rope yamaki hashiripraama.

to reach land one after the other quickly. hashiripraama.

you have yellow urine. wa niaasi frãre.

yellow, yellowish, dirty yellow; to have a yellow (sickly) tint. frãre.

to be at war (lit.: to cause a violent and lasting pain). tihetimapou.

to make groan. rããmomai.

term. aprou.

to make a domesticated bird perch, to let someone perch a bird, to wait for a bird to alight before shooting an arrow at it. romai.

to perch, to be perched; to alight, to be alighted. roo.

to drool (when asleep or sick). fkahu upe yãnão.

to drool. yãnão.

it stretches, slackens (durative). prehuai.

to stretch, slacken, loosen. prehu.

to roll up partially, to fold once (the edge of an object). wapureai.

The son-in-law hunts, fishes and cuts down large trees during the clearing season, also acting as a messenger. siyohamou.

to fulfill the premarital service owed to the in-laws. siyohamou.

she went again towards the wapu fruits (to eat them). wapu ke ki nape hua korã.

to go towards, to approach. korã-.

twisted, with plural object. torokorariyo.

as they climbed a steep rock, Kasimi had vertigo. pei maki ha pe ha yãmothoni, kasimi a shi kirihoma.

to have vertigo, to be dazzled. kiriﬁ.

to unravel, untwist, or fray repeatedly. kusheshetou.

to remove wood shavings locally by striking obliquely with a cutting instrument, to work a wooden surface in that way. pakekeai.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

to curve, to bend. ithoreprou.

What laziness that one has. kurahe the wai ta mohihita.

What laziness he/she has!. mohihita.

(related to pee nahe kare). pee nahe hiipou.

I was terrified and lost my mind. yare puhi ha yarerini, ya puhi tao re mape.

to be terrified, to lose one. yarerini.

here is the tapir bathing descending the river. ei theepi kãi pata yãrimou mi re werepe.

descending a river. werepe.

they shot arrows at the aggressive jaguar. ira ke a waitheri niyai ha kuparuheni.

where are you, brave man. waitheri weti hami pei wa the no mãyo ta kuta ke.

brave, aggressive, stoic. waitheri.

Hoo had eaten his brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

to eat/consume entirely. hooni.

to have healed, to have grown, to have caused healing (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). hatukerayou.

1. to rush, to precipitate oneself 2. to plant, to sow, to transplant in a small area. prouhu.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

compress, crush, press against the ground, keep an object in place by putting a weight on it or applying pressure with the hand. hiki.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their tools, their tools did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slide without penetrating (the blade of a tool in poor condition). pãhehou.

Orilla alta de un meandro, lugar en donde la corriente choca contra la orilla erosionándola poco a poco: la orilla es alta, el agua profunda y los peces se refugian allí durante la estación seca.. heprou.

to launch magical substances at someone by projecting them with a flick of the wrist. yokeprou.

he/she let the cooking water evaporate. u wehetimapema.

to let the cooking water evaporate (through negligence). wehetimapei.

the tree stump is short. hii nanoka manakoroa.

stump, tree stump. nanoka.

to start doing something. pathothoai.

he sat alone, near there, on a small fallen tree. hii hiki ihirupi ha a yãmi roa payekekema.

ihirupiprai: to make small, to fabricate small, to reduce the size of something that is too big. ihirupiprai : volver pequeño, fabricar pequeño, achicar algo que es demasiado grande.

small, short. ihirupi.

hang your hammock there, where it was hung before. ke ki re yãoperei ha wa ha thaa ha koparuni.

to hang. yãoperei.

don't insist on proferingthreats (= stop threatening all the time). a wã tetea he heyatiparuhe.

insist on doing something despite opposition or warnings. heyatiparuhe.

I open the fish. yuri ya pe shipe ka thai.

to open (an animal); to manifest objections. thararei.

go then to dry your arrows at the place where we discovered a small stream long ago. mihi ai pe u poko re reoperei ha, iha a mi ta hahe she.

we discovered. reoperei.

she broke a thorn immediately with her fingers. misiki a kea ha shoareni.

tomorrow morning I will go to gather corn (by tearing off the ears with my hand). yono ya moku keai henaope.

to break, split, or tear off with the hand. shoareni.

to cut a tree. manakoro.

1. to start swaying (an object planted in the ground), 2. to shake an object planted in the ground, to pull it out or to verify if it is firmly embedded. hãwekeãi.

they are people from the Mahekoto community, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to belong to the same community; to be of the same species or class. shiroo.

place yourself at the front of the canoe. a ta oraiku.

to walk or be at the front of a canoe. orakei.

the skins of the fruits without skin were scattered on the ground. mo warokoshi mi tikukuoma.

to have lost its pericarp (when speaking of eteweshi fruits), to have lost its shell, its covering (fruit); to have lost its skin. ierra.

it is as if you were advancing sinking in the mud. hawe ãhiãhi ke a kawei ha wamaki wai kaweheaprarou totihia.

to advance through muddy ground. kaweheaprarou.

I have a cough (lit. kamiye ya toso.

to have a cough. toso.

he has had a fixed gaze for a while. mamoku royokotio.

the stars do not twinkle. shitikari pe mamoku pata royokoprawe.

fixed gaze. royokorãyou.

the ancestors committed many incests. weremou no motaai ha yaiikuni.

committed. yaiikuni.

he is sitting there. kiha a roatayoa.

is sitting there. roatayoa.

my brother-in-law (vocative or reference form used during shamanic sessions). shorimawe.

to make something pass beyond, to let something pass beyond. torehamai.

psychotropic substance. yakoãna.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (perfective, plural object). yakekerei.

footprint, trail. mãyo.

to wait for an attack without fear. no tataai.

to wait for an attack without fear. tataai.

he tied the two gallinetas (birds) together and carried them on his back. hãshimo ke kipi parekerema.

to tie two long objects together and carry them on one. parekerema.

The unidentified tree is tall. Mapayawe namohi a mão.

tree (unidentified). mapayawe.

he went, in the forest, to the place where he had hidden his blowgun. thora ke a wãri romapope ha a hurayoma.

to invite someone to one. romapou.

to straighten, to become straight. sharirirayou.

small smooth-bodied catfish (Pimelodidae); its sharp spines are feared and fishermen break them to avoid injury. moshukunai.

make the child come to the center of the group. ihiru a ta mi ãmopari.

to place someone in the center of a group or in the middle of the water. ãmoparei.

to make the noise that a taut string makes when vibrating. phãophãomo.

Tucán utilizó afrodisíaco y así transformó la mente de la mujer (para seducirla y llevársela a su casa). puhipe yai tharariyo, perf.

to transform the mind, to seduce. tharariyo.

low, near the ground. yahatoto yape.

low, near the ground. yapani.

to hurry to go. rekesa.

(habla de río arriba). thaithai henaki.

palm. thaithai.

The plant cultivated is Lagenaria sp. Õ koã ãsho koa hesi.

plant cultivated; Lagenaria sp. (Cucurbitaceae). o.

tranquilízate (calm down). a ta yãnikik i.

to calm down, to become tranquil. yãnikik.

to dent or deform in multiple places (perfective aspect, plural object). wãukuãmakei.

have you not observed it. wama a no wãri ta tarehaw e.

to observe, to notice. tarehaw.

to turn yellow (plant). si teã.

to repair several arrows. kateheapei.

to repair, to put back in good condition. reparar.

to be short, to be shrunken, to be low and rounded (an object); to be short in stature (a person). hatakawe.

to become blunt, to flatten. pohotoai.

Ouch!. tahi!.

I trampled (intentionally) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to trample. katikiakei.

to shorten (point of). pookosi.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered with longitudinal stripes. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to have longitudinal lines or stripes. shetitoimi.

the ground broke after having sunk little by little (possibly as a result of an earthquake). a pitha re hetiriherihe, a pitha pata re rairaipraruhe ye e.

to oscillate, to sink little by little (due to progressive and successive movements). rairaiprou.

I dropped the machete. sipara ya huherema.

to drop something in a specific place. huhekei.

Woodpecker would climb up along the tree trunk for a while, then stop, then continue climbing. hii ke hi ha eshãmiriwe ke a yeteatarou kuaaherima.

to move along a vertical surface. yeteaprarou.

to be in a hurry. hokehoke.

the butterfly flew. potopoto natha hi.

butterfly. potopoto.

when I was a young man I used to offer many objects (= I was generous). ya huyao tehe matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

young man, person of male sex apt for procreation. huyao.

to speak a language distinct from the local language. pashimo.

the beads of the necklace that he had broken scattered. tope ke pe huhetima no yapikamama.

scattered. yapikamama.

they climbed (the mountain) and, while climbing, Kasima felt dizzy. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a V.

to climb, to ascend. yãmothema.

to remove leaves from a path with the hand and place them on the ground (for good luck during a search). hãrãruãrei.

he walked around showing off in front of the women. weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, ya ki kãi huyamou ta yaio.

to show off, to flaunt. huyamou.

they took a bath to purify their bodies that smelled after the cremation. ke kipi ni hithãri pakokai kuaai re paki shoatariyowei.

to purify oneself, to purify oneself with water in the morning after a cremation. pakeke.

(children or women chant this to make the rain stop). prararaiku, prararaiku.

to diminish in intensity (the rain). prararaai.

to make love noisily (said by a man). sokãsokãmo.

Classifier noun, belongs to the insect taxonomy. Clas.

insect. kona.

he transported the big rock again on his shoulder. maa ke ma pata yarukepou kooma.

1. Put on the shoulder. 2. Press, squeeze. yaruke.

to paint something red-light in a specific place; to dye something red-light. momihikei.

the fish pulls the fishing line or guaral slightly several times. yuri a ikoikomou.

to pull slightly several times. ikoikomou.

to fall ill (and due to this disrupt the course of one. yapekeprou.

there where the váquiros move, in the very center of the herd, the wind blows and brushes against them. ware ke ki kuaape hami, mi ãmo totihi hami, watori ke e mãririwe totihii.

to move, to go, to displace. kuaape.

to squat to defecate (human, animal). thopoho.

to hang low; to hang, tie with a fairly long rope, tie a canoe at the end of a fairly long rope (so that the boat can follow the rise or fall of the water during the night), tie a load to be carried on the back with a fairly long strap so that it can hang at a good height (neither too high nor too low). preyuai.

to clean a gun barrel or tube in that manner. mi ka tiprokoai.

to clean a gun barrel or tube by moving a long stick back and forth. tiproka.

they are lined up (they are grouped in a row). the hirao wirinawe.

to be lined up, to be grouped in a row. wirinaa.

ellos nos hicieron huir. yamareki yashurema.

expulsar de ira. yatirawe.

as he was blind, they carried him in a hammock. a huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki ha.

eat, blind one (vocative form). hupewe, a ta iya.

to be blind. hupepi.

the canoe capsized. kanawa a he ohorayoma.

to disappear suddenly in the middle of something, to be swallowed up; to capsize (a canoe). ohorayou.

to begin to do something. heikiprai.

there the Yanomami position themselves on both sides of the herd of white-lipped peccaries and shoot arrows at them. kihami ware ke ki ha yãnoãmi the ki hore shekiamou yakaroai mapei ha.

to straddle, to be astride, to be overflowing on both sides. yakarokei.

who broke my arrow. wetini sherekaye a keprarema.

who. wetini.

to be lazy. wãkereai.

you are always whimpering. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to sob, to whimper. eheehemo.

to bend, to curve, to arch (perfective). ithorerayou.

cuando ustedes lanzan los demonios de la enfermedad (no wãri) en dirección a seres humanos, éstos convergen hacia ellos (para contaminarlos). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

1. to converge, 2. to give many gifts to the same person, 3. to become numerous, to grow in number, 4. to take, give or receive many objects or many parts of food. prukaai.

to start making round, spherical. komoreprai, ponerse a.

to start making round, spherical. komoreprai.

to become smooth; to homogenize, to remove all unblended particles (from a compote). kopeherayou.

to sink the belly. wãheãi.

cooked; dry (wood). ripi.

cooked; dry (wood). ripi.

bow made from wood that is not hard enough. faraasi nahi.

immature, unripe, not hard enough (for making bows). faraasi.

to bathe. yãrimorayou.

that is what we intend to do and that is the reason why we leave you here. ei naha re pe niya ha thapramani, pusi pe thapi heipou ma re kui.

to leave behind, abandon on the way. hãmipramai.

to belong to another community. shokeprawe.

it gets dark and also it can be The word 'komã' in Yanomami means 'to have'. ka he komããi.

to get dark. komã.

the load strap is too short. natha yekehiwe.

too long load. yekehikei.

aplaskataoto is a tree (unidentified (animal, plant)). aplaskataoto hi Bot.

tree (unidentified). aplaskataoto.

to let spoil, to let damage. wãrimoraV.

worked in the conucos (gardens). fhikarimomarei.

the wasp nest whose (tubular) opening is curved. kopina moroshi re payokoi.

curved, hooked, having the shape of an arc of circumference, being completely curved. payokoi.

Tucán flew towards the broken liana that was still swaying, and clung to it. thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepiritha we a yei re notioimi, thotho yãteyãtemou shoao tehe a yeteprapariyoma.

to sway, to swing, to rock. yãte.

the ancestor ran crying towards the house and also it can be The word 'poreri' in Yanomami means 'to laugh'. poreri pe miã kãi rerepeherima.

ancestor. poreri.

bark of a tree that previously came off easily. wariprou.

How nice that fire smells. hiyã.

exclamation uttered when smelling something pleasant. hiyã.

to be afraid. hutahutamou.

to those paujíes with red butts perched there, they want to skin their crests. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

crest and neck skin of a bird (paují). roore.

to be dispersed in the forest in various camps. kasiprawe.

inform. wã hem i.

the one that is beautiful (referring to the king vulture). areriyehei.

to fray, to unravel. warokoshi.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

destroy, damage. wãriãprai.

I claim the goods, while the demons of dusk reject my hands. weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hãiihe tehe, ya ta nako sho.

Brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do we will run over each other. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to push away, reject someone, run over. hãiãi.

the dog has been several days without going hunting, make him kill a tapir. shama ke a ta shemahe, hiima ke a prao he weyaprou ma re korohe.

to spend several nights in a place (different from where one usually lives); to remain several days in a given situation. weyaprou.

mother-in-law, go get water so I can drink. yape, miha mãu u ta yakea, ya u ta koa.

I go to get water. mãu ya u yakeai.

to get (using a container), to go get water. yakea.

to inhale a hallucinogen. rawahawe.

ya el calor ardiente del demonio omãyãri se difunde por mi pecho. heyoshi pakayua waikipariyo kuhe.

ardent heat. pakayua.

to be slightly open towards the exterior. uhehea.

ya el calor ardiente del demonio omãyãri se difunde por mi pecho. heyoshi pakayua waikipariyo kuhe.

ardiente. waikipariyo.

we move in a line and hear the women's crying. yamaki re tutuaiwei, suwe re pe miã kuoma.

we move in a line. tutuaiwei.

to burn, to suffer a burn, to turn brown from heat. frãnãpirayou.

mis piernas se entumecieron. ya mathaki shi harihirayoma.

to become numb. harihirayou.

it was he who killed him, he expresses his satisfaction. ihini thora a ha kushereni a wã topraa kure.

blowpipe. ihini.

immediately she rubbed against her, and she insulted her. mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma.

we are both ugly and bad, and we have insulted each other. peheki wãri wãritiwe yahatuayou totihio ke a kuhe.

to insult someone, to offend them by publicly proclaiming their physical imperfections (real or presumed). insultado.

enter silbando (whistling) into a dwelling (a visitor). koikoimou.

it was him who kept my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kaokoaparei.

divide. repokosiai.

to be angry. shopari wake.

to be angry. shopari.

to remain still for a moment (an animal). hothoprao.

brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do, we will reject each other. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to reject someone, to repel, to kill (in certain contexts). hãihãyou.

dry. wehetiwe.

to lower or incline the head. teikei.

ant nest and also it can be The word 'nido' in Yanomami means 'nest'. l nido de hormigas.

nest. nido.

when Yoawe saw the woman, he turned into a rock partridge to catch her. yoaweni suwe a taprai tehe, a niya ha huweani, a hore ehoãmi unaprou shoaoma.

One of the two demiurges, elder brother of Õmawe. In the different myths where he intervenes, he plays the role of deceiver.. yawetiwe.

to have messy or tousled hair. he hurukuo.

we have intentions of attacking them anyway. yama the pe niya shurukai he ha yatiokirini.

to mess up or tousle someone. hurukai.

there were knives, but the two children have damaged them and there are no more left. kushiyo re pe kuoma ma kui ihiru ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

knife. ushiyo.

extend your hands (so that I can give you something). imiki ta poshokoiku.

two cupped hands to receive something. poshokoiku.

shaman. shamaori.

the leaves of the wakata tree cry like spider monkeys. wakata henaki re pashomorãkiri.

to imitate the behavior of the spider monkey. thayo.

the paujíes perched one after the other on top of the monster rahara. rahara ke ki hetupi hami paruri ke ki ropraama.

to perch, to roost. ropraama.

to sweat. si ahi fyopri hai.

to sweat. fyopri.

his/her pet. pe himapi.

it was a big dog, a good hunter. hiima ke a pata suhirina kuoma.

the shaman had a tortoise as a pet. shaporini poshotomi ke a hiima thapoma.

his/her pet, his/her dog. himapi.

mañana trabajaré en los conucos (río abajo). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

río abajo se oyó el ruido de un motor fuera de borda que remontaba. motoro a wã petarekirio, a wã mi yãmokirioma.

mañana por la mañana descenderemos (de la montaña). henaha pemaki yohoo henaokiriope.

downstream, downriver. mikiri.

suwe moko: pubescent woman, woman of childbearing age. suwe moko: mujer púber, mujer en edad de procrear.

pubescent woman, woman of childbearing age. suwe moko.

you will remember this. hatukeope.

stream, brook, minor watercourse without depth. etehe.

he has intention of coming to attack me with magic plants, that one with the eyes dotted with points. ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei, mamo pe wãri re tipikiini.

to have painted dots/circles on the body or face. tipikikei.

possessions provoke envy. matohi pe ha the pe puhi waiamai.

Bat desired her pubic hair (lit. pei weshi pe ha heweriwe a puhi waioma (mit. : Bat coveted the pubic hair). ).

to desire, to covet, to envy. waio.

it is without a doubt because of those constant itches that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

to laugh. ikãprarou.

to stick, affix (multiple objects). sutimai.

I express my impotence. the pe wetiprou ha mrakuni.

my impotence. mrakuni.

(speaks of upriver). sharurumi henaki.

wild plant (unidentified). sharurumi.

to have a stained face. mi ishi.

to have a stained face. mi ishi.

offer the other arrows. fei ai ki re kui e ki ta totoku.

offer. totoku.

to let someone go live elsewhere. yakemai.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. kihami ya koketayoma pei maki hami ya peria nareatayoa (mit.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. koketayoma.

if only I could bathe. ya the ha yarimoruni.

to bathe. yarimoruni.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami (carried by the current) were passing one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma (mit.

to be partially filled or emptied (terminative aspect). hayaroprou.

1. To insist on, to persist in doing something despite an obstacle or difficulty. 2. To accumulate little by little, to carry out a task little by little; to cook a large amount of food in several stages. yãshiãi.

they piled up the leaves and then she swept the floor. yãã pe henape ha yototoamapotuheni, pitha a hoãremahe.

she shaves her pubic hair. hoãremahe.

to clean one. titheo.

the tree is entangled. hii hãã.

to be entangled, to be caught. fãã.

give that to the one who is lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

plural persons, disposed. shikãpramou.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

to become loose, to loosen, to become unsteady. proroai.

Zoological term, bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). Zool. It builds its nest in tree hollows, its honey is slightly sour. , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta).

bee (unidentified species). makiopi.

dense vegetation. vegesipara.

some had already finished placing the horizontal rods for the lower part of the future dwelling. ai peni hãto nahi shikã rereamai waikiomahe.

you all had already left, why didn't you tell me. ai pe pruka kua waikia, wamaki kunomi.

they had already finished/completed (something). waikiomahe.

He went upriver. Ni wake huu.

upriver. ni.

to divide longitudinally, separate into a V shape. erekãi.

to be a little hard. fhihuhu-.

he is a liar and also a thief. a horemou, a kãi thomi.

they also transformed into spider monkeys. pasho pe kãi kuprariyoma (mit.

he ran crying and arrived at his house. miã kãi rerea ha yairiherini, kama pe yahipi hami a koprariyoma.

Jaguar's son fell asleep immediately, with his mouth open. ira pe ihirupi miã kãi kahiki rerea shoapariyoma (mit.

also, equally, and (coordination), at the same time that; can also be translated as . hunomi.

black fly, gnat. pareto.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

to be wrinkled, to have wrinkles. rukurãi.

light black. ishi puhi ehepi.

light red. puhi.

"Come to get us. "yamare ta koreyo. ", they shouted. ", pe komima.

come to get us/them. koreyo.

they said that, then I became the target of their shots. pe pe wãri kuu ha ya niyaprariyoma.

to become the target of one or several shots. niyaprariyoma.

to be at a higher level, to be a little higher up. yutehe.

Cachicamo ate all the honey and left. moro upe waa ha hititirini a harayoma (mit.

left. harayoma.

as it was night, they searched blindly for small pieces of wood to warm themselves. the mi ruwe ha koã ke ãsho pe wai hosisãmahe.

to search blindly, to search for something underwater. hosisãi.

he shot an arrow at a bird and the arrow got stuck (in the branches). kirithami a pehi ha niyakini shereka a hãkema.

to get stuck, to get caught. hãkema.

He harvests the kahu tree fruits. Uu hiyeai kahu wake.

to harvest fruits using a long pole with a narrow fork at the end. hiyeai.

to thin out, to make thin. hepisamai.

to press, to squeeze. hisini.

cassava flour drink. mayoko huu pe.

I will come anyway. ya huu kuyeheo mai ke the.

due to what you just took out (from me), my anger will not end. pei wa hore ma terehe hushuo kuyeheo mai ke the.

not to modify one. kuyeheo.

they have to gather leaves and also it can be The word 'hena' in Yanomami means 'leaf'. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe.

leaves. hena.

there is honey upriver (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

upriver, there where there is a sandbank. mrakatahu a re prapohori ha.

the spider monkey rests (upriver, in a tree). pasho a wãshimi horupohori.

upriver, upstream. pohori.

go quickly to pluck the roof leaves (to prevent the fire from spreading). kiha yaa ke mishiki ukukuprai ta hairo.

to grab or pluck (repeatedly). ukukai.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, clean it, leave it clean. takakaamai.

soft egg in formation. fnathe nanapi.

egg yolk. fnathe shãhe.

egg. fnathe.

Horonãmi was a very good hunter. Horonãmi era un cazador muy bueno.

a good hunter. horonãmi.

It is a lie. hore ke the pe sin.

lie, pretense. hore.

son, prepare a bark rope to carry me. pusi yare natha ta thakiyo.

will they finally prepare that rope for (carrying) the pot. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

bark rope, cord made from tree bark used for carrying loads. fãifãiyomi.

el frío me impide mantenerme sobre mis piernas. ya wahati no wãri uprawema.

impede. uprawema.

to draw a thick line around the mouth with blood. kahiki warukuo.

to draw a thick line around the mouth. waruku.

I vomited without realizing (the speaker is under the effect of a hallucinogen). ya suhai hãthoo no kupereshi.

vomit. hãthoo.

to become blunt, to lose sharpness. wahoto.

The doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to be riddled with holes or punctures. tereshãi.

dominated by anger, I want to leave this dwelling. ãyuwã ke the pe wayu ha.

anger. ãyuwã.

Honey produced by the wãmorã na bee. It is sweet.. wãmorã.

to send someone to navigate in a canoe; factitive of kareprou and karepraai. karepraamai.

we regrouped and threw ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to gather, to regroup. kokãmoruni.

mi hijo ha matado un váquiro, ha escogido una bestia preñada. the hi pe yaithawe tifetiprarema.

has tallado (el mortero) en una madera que no es adecuada (lit.: desconocida). tifetiprarema.

to knead cassava flour so that it remains slightly moist inside. urererarei.

to keep the head extended for a moment. hiyãhãprao.

the mountain is tall. hehu a isiwe.

tall, high. isiwe.

tight, taut. usutu.

to sway, to swing back and forth (especially when carrying objects on the back). maikonami.

to become beautiful (plants in a garden, particularly plantain and cambur plants). tirirou.

it was raining heavily. maa ke pe pata re priririmoperei.

it was raining heavily. priririmoperei.

tábano, pegón. pukuye.

to make (someone) groan. rããmomai.

to do, to make. momare.

He lay down on the ground. Rasike ama.

to lie on the ground, to put oneself at ground level. rasike.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). yeteke.

the people of Poriporimapiwei detested us a lot. poriporimapiwei theri peni wamareki napemai meparoomahe: los de Poriporimapiwei nos detestaban mucho.

Why would we detest each other. weti ellos la guerra.

to detest, to hate, to have an aversion towards someone. napemai.

to begin to surpass (in height). hetorehe.

habitually blows a cool breeze (in the morning, before dawn). fwahari a phouo tharei.

habitually blows a cool breeze. fwahari.

they transformed into beasts. yarorariyo.

I feel like vomiting. ya no suharayopi.

to vomit. suharayou.

to begin to surpass (in height). toreheai.

his wife was under, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

at the foot of the mountain, the river flows there. fei kitato ke ki pehithe ha, fei faye a re perire, ihini yare niya prapoma.

under, at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pe.

pot-bellied, big-bellied (offensive if said in the presence of the person referred to). maikasi.

he obstructed the opening of the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

entrance, opening, passage. horeawei.

"Father-in-law. shoape. Father-in-law. shoape. " he shouted. e komima.

they shouted for someone to come get them (lit. "yamare ta koreyo. "Come get us. ", pe komima.

to shout several times at different intervals. komitaai.

a term used in upriver speech. fehu.

to have made something yellow, to have left something to burn (and become yellow). frãrãpramarei.

hunter. waika ãshi.

we (I and them) have filled the baskets with pijiguaos. kamiye yamakini rasha yama pe thariki re thaapotayouwei.

while the members of my community stay to kill the enemy effigy, I walk ahead in company of the others. kamiye yamakini iha no owe a shei hoohe nareo tehe ya paria narerayoherima.

we (emphatic, including the speaker and others). yamakini.

cause that he fell ill far from his home (due to my manipulations). wãrihoto.

immediately the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the surface of the water. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma (mit.

to swim, to float, to flow, to let oneself go. kare.

Rabipelado was lying in his hammock, and suddenly he turned around (in the described way). nãroriwe ke a ha hushutoni, hesika wãri reprai yaioma, a mi wãri hemihiprou ha mahironi.

to look behind oneself, to turn around; to turn one. hemihiprou.

the compota de cambur is homogeneous. tate u si kopehewe.

not homogeneous, with solid particles. contesiki.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pę rę koyokaiwei, ya pę now thaa shoarei kurei.

people from another community. koyokaiwei.

it became day slowly. the mi opisi re harupeiw ei.

it became day slowly. harupeiw.

the spider monkeys move along the branches of the horoweti trees. horoweti hiki poko hami pasho ke pe imima.

horoweti tree trunk. horoweti mosi.

a type of tree. horoweti.

(antonym). mãro.

to tell someone to go somewhere (upriver). fu.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

to offer food, to feed someone. kupohoroni.

his shoulders. he pasukei.

shoulders. pasukei.

to place oneself very close to, to stick to. pakiikei.

speak without waiting. watete.

to be angry. shararamo.

I am no longer a little child (humorous antithesis, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

little bird that is just starting to grow feathers. akamakapi.

to wear a loincloth (lit. shina reia.

to have hanging down, to wear (a loincloth). reia.

to cause several trees to fall in the same direction by felling a larger tree (during clearing). pakakumarei.

pork meat. koshino yãhi.

domestic pig. koshino.

to be hungry. marueti.

he/she made someone bend over. mi thorukukei.

to make someone bend over. thorukukei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta nohãiku.

to follow, to go after. koro-tou.

I trace a line with onoto across my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to have had oneself painted with a curved line going from one ear to the other across the forehead. tiwaromokei.

the two demiurges learned to make dangerous bamboo tips. kupariyonowei.

keep the head down for a good while. teitao.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to curve, to bend into an arc shape. payokou.

to clean the inside of an object. yarumai.

diurnal butterflies. wari mahi.

Imitate Rashakami. rashakami ke a ta oweprari, ihi.

Mythical warrior. He is brave and not afraid to go to war alone.. rashakami.

we called each other, we were there. yamaki pokomayoma, yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to call each other shouting. pokomayou.

the fish shake and also it can be The word 'ro' in Yanomami means '(no clear translation)'. kupe ro.

shake. ro.

if you look at them you will make them sick and also it can be The word 'wãshimi' in Yanomami means 'to be out of breath, tired; to be tired of remaining in an uncomfortable position'. ke ki ha a wãshimi horua mahirayoma (mit. It is a Verb (Intransitive). ).

look at. wãshimi.

he is afraid to speak to you. kahe ke iha a kahiki kuyeoma.

to refrain from speaking, to abstain from saying what one wants to say (often out of shyness). kuyeprou.

to mix, put together different objects or substances, mix different hallucinogens, mix beads of different colors. koyokokei.

Nosiriwe cried for lack of tobacco. nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

In all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

Ancestor who spread tobacco. Nosiriwe.

disperse quickly (each one in a different direction). pe ta rereo shoaomopotu.

disperse (each one in a different direction). shoaomopotu.

they (two) followed downstream the river of spells. heritha u ha ke kipi mi werema.

to follow a watercourse downstream. werei.

to twist the bowstring by rolling it on the thigh with the palm of the hand (during bow making). hãto nahitha prikipriki.

to twist the bowstring by rolling it on the thigh with the palm of the hand (during bow making). prikipriki.

the egg of gallineta that you cooked (at a certain time of the day). hãshimo wa nathe re hariprei.

that was here a moment ago. hariprei.

to start filling a container up to the brim. rahoprai.

to say which community one belongs to, to indicate one's kinship. wãhã hirou.

to indicate one. wãhã hira.

I only managed to graze the white-lipped peccaries (with the arrows I shot at them). ware ya pe shiro si tikekerarema.

to scratch, to graze (once), to reach superficially (when shooting an arrow). tikekeai.

to finish, to exhaust. watheai.

(he) wanted to see if there were seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open or gut an animal by slitting its abdomen longitudinally. eririkei.

they were left crippled on the ground. the pata shikopi praa re hekeiwei (mit.

heavy, clumsy, dull. shiko-.

hermano mayor, realmente la pesca es muy buena. ãi, kurahe yuri ke ki wai ta toaape.

very good. toaape.

he is the one who deceived us (you and him). kamani wahereki miramama.

you + another (you and him). wahereki.

río abajo, en el conuco, no hay realmente sino dos racimos cortos de plátanos. porakapi kuratha ke kipi wai onohowe yaua totihia kupiyekiri.

to shorten something. onohoãmãi.

women, I beg you to all participate in this activity. suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in an activity. haikiprou.

the hekura pursued them and they disappeared. hekura peni pe ha yashuprariheni pe mrarayoma.

they pursued and disappeared. yashuprariheni.

to be covered in dew. hemaãhupiprou.

to board one after the other. tikepraai.

to have fun during. nohi iriãmoãi.

to have fun. iriãmo.

to resist with courage. wãroyou.

to have begun to rise (the day). uheherayou.

dye that was made darker. no ushia.

the two were big and soon appeared. ke kipi yareheo ha yaioni, the kipi wawetou ha yaironi.

here is where it first appeared. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

to become visible, to appear. wawe.

my legs went numb. ya mathaki shi harihirayoma.

my legs went numb. harihirayoma.

to start fabricating a slightly longer arrow than usual. tireheprai.

a splendid woman danced on the sand. uwe ke a no aipi tirereoma, mrakatahu ke a ha.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksand attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

sand. mraka.

undergrowth that was cut to establish a field. sotobosque que fue cortado para establecer un conuco.

clearing, field. peye.

when the antepasados perforated the ground, the water (that gushed out) fell in the place where Thunder is, there where Thunder lives there is a vast expanse of water. no patapi peni u re tiwehaiwehei yãru ihami u keketayoma, yãru ihami ai u motu paa (mit.

do you know Thunder. yãru wa tai kure. how is his head. weti naha ke he kuwe.

Thunder. yãru.

the children were hunting small birds. ihiru peni kirithami pe niyatumahe.

generic term for small birds. piomi.

housefly. moo.

the house of the enemies (lit. fira ke makayopi o kithanari ke makayopi.

piles of rocks. makayopi.

he was so affected by the demons of disease that he could no longer speak (= he was so sick that he could no longer speak). aka porepi a kuoma, pruka wayuwayu ke kini a ha tereni.

demons of disease and epidemics. wayuwayu.

while he was sitting without moving, Yoawe (lit. wãrishewe ke a roa yãnikitou tehe, a mamo yeo tehe, suwe a tararema.

to do something without hurry, to remain calm. ãnikou.

myth. shoakekirioma.

round and hard object from which a piece has been broken off by biting. wahathoa.

that has been knotted in whirlpools. moshokorema.

la pared rocosa de la montaña es muy alta y hay un piapoco encaramado en ella. pei ke maki tirewe totihiwe hami, iha mayepi ke a kãi re rorakiri.

piapoco encaramado. rorakiri.

I was convinced that a snake was going to bite me and I walked with apprehension. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to walk with apprehension. haruapraroma.

the rocky face of Mount Mashohara shines beautifully. mashoharapiwei ki pariki pata re shutukahe noshi re harirape e.

beautifully. harirape.

to sleep deeply. fmio sutao.

to sleep deeply. sutakei.

to receive leftovers at one's home. sheepei obras a su casa.

to receive leftovers. sheepei.

he prevented his mother-in-law from sleeping. pe yesi a miã shihihirimapoma.

to keep someone awake, to prevent someone from sleeping. hihirimapoma.

it's foggy, it's cloudy. fthe mimou ihirashipi.

to become cloudy, to become foggy. shipiai.

extend (a flexible thing), stretch a liana between two banks to cross a stream. frihiãmai.

don't put the fishhook in your mouth, because you might swallow it. uhea a hopotihe, wa suharei.

to swallow, to gulp down. suharei.

(pei) (habla del sur del Orinoco.). hiimotho.

to be afraid. mratamratamo.

to be completely wrinkled, flabby or soft. wãpretewe.

qué mandón es ése. kurahe the wai ta nosiyemou piyeapraowe.

expresses astonishment. piyeapraowe.

to limp, to hobble. tiyerii.

¿cuántos hay. weti naha the kua.

how much?. ¿cuánto?.

to change direction one after another. akepraai.

even though it is only a diadem, it cuts off my breath. watoshe a ma kuini yare mishiãki ta pakukutaherire.

to cut off one. pakukutaherire.

Refers to the females of various bird species of the genus Pipra sp. The Yanomami are unaware of the marked sexual dimorphism of these birds, and call the females, which are all olive-green in color and very similar across different species, . waketherimi.

to move blindly. hosisiãi.

it is our house. noye ya yãnopi.

our. noye.

to miss someone, to feel sadness for the absence of a loved one. iyoo.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to curve sharply downward. wahohowe.

to open, split, break partially. homo.

Jaguar, hungry for meat, looked for it without finding it. ira a naikiripi taema ma kui, a tapranomi.

to act dominated by hunger for meat; to be a cannibal, an eater of animal flesh. naikiripi.

los que estaban curándose mutuamente (en la casa) se callaron. the pe nohi re reayouwei the matha re waiprap e i.

to cure each other. *prope.

they seemed like termite nests scattered on the ground. hawe rishima koko pata yapikamai yaioma.

to be scattered, strewn, spread out on the ground. yapikamai.

to move by jumping, as frogs do. yutuyutumou.

they all surrounded and beat him. komi e pe he hã hãyopraruni, a sheremahe.

when we had finished surrounding them, the enemy warriors did not respond. wayu pe ã hai mi hetuonomi, yãnomãmi re the pe he hãyoprou tehe.

to surround, encircle, besiege. hãyo.

there, downstream, in the place where they have the habit of fishing. kihi koro totihi ha, yuri pe re kãprããi totihiowehei ha.

to have the habit of leaving something in the same place. kãprããi.

bejuco (vine); Drymonia serrulata (Gesneriaceae). shãkurãmi thotho.

perfective of the verb pasu-, wã tisu-. tishishiakei.

to do this (removing a liquid circularly using a stick, particularly something being cooked) several times in succession. yakoretaakei.

when she arrived she sat in the hammock near her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

it's far upriver. the prahapohori.

are you all going to probe the hole (up there). wama hipai re waikipohori. It's still inside. iha re a wãri peria shoaa kupohori (mit.

up, above, on top. kupohori.

split the lechosa (plant) in two. shamakoro ya hakaroprarema.

split it in two. hakaroprarema.

the great rock tilted slowly. pei maki pata opi raitariyoma (mit.

the great rock tilted slowly. raitariyoma.

a type of macaw. iyeiyerimi.

sostienen el techo de la casa de los antepasados. the ki rahakapi makekeprarou yaioma.

ancestors. rahakapi.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to be partially curved, to have a curved end. payokoa.

golden-headed manakin (bird species). kãrikinãmi.

to reach a path one after another. he hapraai.

to emerge, protrude; to pass the head through a hole; to reach a path. hapraai.

as it was raining heavily I was wet and chilled. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

chilled, frozen. aterido.

they did not enter (our house), they spent the night going around it. pe hanomi, pe ãyoãprarou he harutoma.

to go around, to circle. hanomi.

to protect from rain. wehetimakei.

the arrow broke into pieces upon impact. ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei.

it broke into pieces upon impact. yahetiprareiwei.

sun. waraka.

to make something pass beyond, to let something pass beyond. torehamai.

the demon women of dusk. weyariyoma.

he slept, then he set off again (making the leaves crunch). a mioma, shurushurua korãyoherima.

to return directly, to go back directly. korãyoherima.

tell this one to do it. hei ke a ta nosiyemahe.

tell him/her to do it, order, ask a favor (for another). nosiyemahe.

their voices were heard going around a curve in the forest. kei kuaai kuprei: se oyeron sus voces recorriendo una curva por la selva.

to move through the forest describing numerous curves. shokou.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, clean it, leave it clean. takakaamai.

the sky clears up again. the heão koã.

to clear up after the rain (the sky). heãkei.

she (cries) raising and lowering over her head objects that belonged to the deceased. matohi ki kãi yokoai.

to raise and lower objects that belonged to a deceased person over one. yokomai.

Deer had Arrendajo as his son-in-law. hayariweni ãyãkorãriwe a siyoha poma.

son-in-law. ãyãkorãriwe.

to disturb, to bother, to hinder the proper development of something. yapekerei.

condition of the pijiguao palms when they produce their clusters on the lower part of the trunk. yakrikiwe.

to shell corn. fy ono moku hushii.

shelled corn (perfective). yono moku hushirarei.

to shell corn. hushii.

to remove a chigger (nigua) using a sharp object (needle or thorn). fhihu na washai.

to remove a chigger (nigua) using a sharp object (needle or thorn). fhihu.

brother of the ãmoã tree. ãmoãmi.

it wears out quickly. i waitou.

to wear out quickly. waitou.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

an object that others want to borrow, an object that is frequently borrowed. mahimamou.

he still had the glans uncovered (in the woman's sex), it was like a hook stuck in the fleshy mouth of a guabina fish. the moka wãri wakataatima, hawe ishawaritomi uhea a weipou kuo totihioma.

to have in the mouth or snout. weipou.

put out the flames and also it can be The word 'sheteke' in Yanomami means 'to carry'. koa wake sheteke.

put out. sheteke.

edible fruit of the terio hi tree. terio.

the cotton hammock was raised (so that no one would settle in). yii ke ki mi werea.

to hang in the void, to be directed towards the ground. werere.

to swell, to become swollen. wãhihiãi.

I believed it was a gallineta (bird). h ãshimo ya puhirema.

to believe, to think, to be convinced. puhirema.

the souls arrived in a group at the dwelling, they really arrived like that. porepore ke pe warerou ha kuikiyoni, pe warerou ha yaiparuni.

to enter or exit in a compact mass composed of many elements, to penetrate in a group into a dwelling. warerou.

a dirty mirror. umokoyoripi co.

dirty superficially, opaque. ukosi.

if visitors arrive in my absence, while I am hunting, do not forget the rules of hospitality, cook cambur compote for them. yaro ya pe taei tehe, hama pe koprou tehe, wamaki puhi mrai mai, tate wama uku tua heapa.

to forget. puhi mraai.

but, you (pl) do not inform us when the husband goes hunting. yamare wãri yimiraimi yaiwe tharomi a kotããi yaimou heama.

to inform, to notify, to warn. yimiraimi.

when he/she arrived at the shore, he/she sat down for a moment. pei u kasi hami a waroo tehe a wãri rotapariyom a.

he/she/it sat down. rotapariyom.

He defended himself (speaking). Nakre wã no huo.

to defend oneself (speaking). wã no hu.

arrow to which the feathering has been tied. shereka he okã no.

come honey and also it can be The word 'puu' in Yanomami means 'honey'. puu upe ta wari.

(no clear translation provided). puu.

I am lighting the fire. koa ya wake yemai.

I got down from the hammock several times to rekindle the fire. ya ha ithotoni, koa ya wake pe yetaai kuperei.

to light a fire. yeakei.

to make a sound with something. imihena kreo.

to make a sound. imihena.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoik u.

to embrace, to hug. waporoai.

hurry up. rokita ropaiku.

to dry with heat. roki.

accumulations, gatherings. shimosiones.

caterpillar, larva. purima.

to become slightly yellow (plants). frãrãã.

(In the myth) Apparition felt fear and was startled. pore ke a ha kiriraruni a ãtiprariyoma.

to startle, to be startled. yoke*prou.

to start to spread. wã he hãyoprou.

to spread, to divulge (information, words said). wã he hãyoãi.

to turn the head. oraki frihihiai.

to turn one. frihihiai.

to carry, transport an object placed on top of a load. heakamapou.

he also put his hands on the front posts of the roof. hehã nahi pe hami kãi imiki wai wariataroma.

he also put his hands on the front posts of the roof. wariataroma.

plant; Spathiphyllum cannaefolium (Araceae). It grows in water, or in places where the soil is soaked with water.. cannaefolium.

it is a bird of prey that killed the two of them, in your absence. koikoimini ke kipi nohi porakaprai hearayou kuhe.

to kill two animals, to kill two enemies. porakaprai.

to have opened, to have separated (like the petals of a flower). wateterayou.

produced shavings. akaweshimararei.

a dull roar came from the nest of the mosquitoes (supernatural insects). peti naki no yaripi rororomoma (mit.

to crackle, to produce a dull roar (of a fire burning, wind in the trees, etc.). rororomou.

This name designates two plants of the same family, which grow in humid soils or along watercourses: Heliconia revoluta and Heliconia hirsuta, bijao (Heliconiaceae). yatas.

plant. yatas.

I put the clothes in shelter (so they don't get wet). iro ya siki washiai.

to put an object in shelter from getting wet. washiai.

to make dents or concave marks in several places. wãhihirei.

to be hungry. taamari.

to become deep (a hole). taroai.

the pulp of those cambures is too hard. hei tate pe re kui pe shãhe amatopi.

to become hard or compact (referring to the pulp of a fruit). amatopiprou.

to become thin (due to illness or excessive sexual activity). hayapishiai.

to make something beautiful, to do something carefully and correctly. koshãpiãi.

to make war. si koropirimi.

the mountain Shãshãpiwei whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

a mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei.

you will bathe immediately after getting water. mãu wa u hikeai tehe wa yarimou shoaope.

to do immediately, to do at the same time, to ventilate. yarimou.

colorant tree. kashipinayoma.

your son. ihiruhe.

he is my son. ihiruye ke a.

they have killed his son. pe ihirupi a sheremahe.

son of a brother (for male speaker) or son of a sister (for female speaker), male child of a parallel cousin. ikayepi.

sources of the Kootopiwei river. kootopiwei u heki ha thomiriyoma.

river name. kootopiwei.

still a little new or recent. ftutohohowe.

he crosses again the threshold of the room bringing a large basket of fruits. momo ke pe pata thari ha yehireni, the horetou re korãyouwei.

a large basket of fruits. korãyouwei.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. reikimapou.

he put it quickly on his shoulder. pei ke hako ha the ruketarema.

since my shoulder did not hurt, I took advantage to bring all the necessary rods (for construction). ya hako niniprou mai ha ya the hiki ma re oa waikimarihe.

shoulder. hakro.

I leaned against a post that faced the central plaza. hehã nahi ha ya waririoma.

to lean against a post facing the central plaza. waririoma.

tense the upper part of the bow for a moment. ora the hi hami the ta iyopraa.

to tense, to make rigid or firm. yopraa.

1. Picramnia macrostachya (tree), 2. Edible caterpillar with two violet-gray bands on its back resembling the color from the leaves of the Picramnia macrostachya tree. kãshipinãyoma.

our song, whose intensity varies, is directed towards you. yamaki ã mohe hotehaimi ye (cha.

to vary in intensity (noise). hotehaimi.

to turn something halfway around, to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemiprou.

he went to the place in the forest where he hid his blowgun. thora ke a wãri romapope ha a hurayoma.

to hide objects in the forest. romapope.

he climbed back up and initiated the last part of his ascent. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

initiated the last part of his ascent. poushokuaharayoma.

to let rot. taremai.

to predict that. nihitaprariyo.

the fish has many bones/spines. yuri a niosi.

the siparariwe fish are full of bones/spines. siparariwe pe niosipi.

fish bone, fish spine. niosi.

to have a light complexion. prushishiwe.

light-colored, pale. prushishi.

they went away when it dawned. tehe mi ukekou pe hurayoma.

went away. ukekerayou.

to get cold. esfriarse.

if you move like that, the humans will hear you and shoot you with arrows. mi naha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

to kill by shooting arrows or firing a gun. niyaprarei.

the woman was truly pregnant. suwe a shipenaa ha yairini.

the woman was pregnant and could not go fast. suwe ke a shipenapi yaro a haiprou maoma.

to be pregnant. shipenaa.

to dry (something). prake.

while Oso hormiguero (Oso hormiguero) was going around, the woman returned directly (to her house). teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriiwei.

she returned directly (to her house). korãyoheriiwei.

I don. mamokahiwe.

to start braiding, to start interweaving fibers. kapirosiprai.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to compress, to press down on; to place one object on top of another to keep it in place. thomiriyomani.

the young people never stay still. huya the pe yãnikio ma re mai.

to be calm, to stop going from one place to another, to stop agitating uselessly. yãnikou.

to be transido with cold. kohipii.

the Waika people suffered repeatedly all day long (lit. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati (mit. : until becoming nofeweri). ).

to suffer repeatedly. nofeweri.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax between his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to squeeze the juice out of a fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held in the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. ãhuhãi.

overgrown with weeds (especially a garden plot or path). yasikai.

to order tobacco leaves one on top of the other to then form them into a ball that is placed inside a closed basket (durative, plural object). ithorimai.

to order tobacco leaves one on top of the other to then form them into a ball that is placed inside a closed basket. ithorimai.

they piled up the leaves and then swept the floor. yãã pe henape ha yototoamapotuheni, pitha a hoãremahe.

they swept the floor. yototoamapotuheni.

to eviscerate. porakapi.

The bark of the ayukuma tree peels off easily. ayukuma a si poshowe.

1. To have multiple blisters. 2. To peel off easily (skin, bark). poshowe.

tubular opening of certain wasp nests. raparaparimi.

when the light (of the lantern) turns red, do not believe (you two) that it will return to normal. ke ki sh wakeai kukema, ke ki sh kuprou koowe puhi kupii mai.

light. koowe.

I take care of the child. ihiru ya heai.

to keep objects left behind by someone, to take care of a child in the absence of their parents. heai.

to walk separately. shererai.

to tear or cut lengthwise into two. sheririprai.

to tear or cut in this way to take them. sheririrei.

to divide, split, separate. sherere.

to move by an impulse. hiruruprou.

to cut a piece of game meat to give as a gift. pakekekei.

to become iridescent, shimmering (perfective of the inceptive). terererayou.

doblarse sobre sí mismo; doblarse, retorcerse. aweawemo.

it. tepepraai.

as those who were walking in front changed direction again, we slid down crouched towards them. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction. akehep.

you will take these arrows when you participate in a long hunting trip. wa henimou ha wa ki pope.

go to the place where we have gone hunting and kill tapirs. hei koro ha pemaki ta henimoprei hami, wamaki ha hur oherini, ware ki ta niyaprari.

to participate in a long hunting trip. henimop.

to cut several pieces of game meat for others (perfective, plural object). pakekerarei.

they prepared arrows. a thanomihe.

they prepared arrows. thanomihe.

noise of a metallic object when struck by a hard object. krehemo.

to have eaten meat or fish. naikarayou.

the turtle was approaching walking in a swaying manner. poshotomi ke a wai paroparomoimama.

swaying manner, like swinging, that turtles have to move. paroparomou.

listen to me attentively. yimika ta hirãrãparu.

to listen attentively. hirãrããi.

to scratch oneself by rubbing against. mãrikio.

to be resolved. puhi yopraai.

to be resolved, to advance resolutely. yopraai.

Remove the burnt outer layer of the roasted banana. Thãsikiãi wake huu koporoma.

to remove the burnt outer layer by scraping. thãsikiãi.

dwelling (shapono). na.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their tools, their tools did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slip without penetrating (the blade of a tool in poor condition). pãhehãi.

to flatten, to level. resisi.

making round, spherical (durative, plural object). komoremai, dur.

making round, spherical. komoremai.

mantener fija. mamoku royokãi.

to keep fixed. royokãi.

you have to say the truth. wa kãi rii ha pehetitaruni.

to say the truth, to say habitually the truth. pehetimou.

to cause to disperse or diverge. rãkokoprãmãi.

1. to become disheveled (hair), 2. to dishevel someone. porukuai.

I am looking for them (while moving). ya pe taeaprarai.

he was advancing, cutting the vegetation and leveling the ground. enaha re e the pe peaprarai kuaama, e the hoãprarai kuaama.

to continue doing something while moving. aprara.

to come from the bottom of a hole or den (noise). fwã hai pawewe.

to accumulate at the bottom of something, to form a deposit; to live at the bottom of a den (animal). pawewe.

numerous kashi ants float on the water's edge. para u kasi hami kashi pe pruka karorowe.

to walk in the water (upriver). karorai.

that one who is sitting at the edge (of the group we form). kasi hami a re roowei.

he went along the edge of the river. parawa u kasi hami a huma.

edge, border, periphery, margin. kasi.

the irokiri nope are all the time lying in their tiny vine hammocks. pei ke pe thoopi wai yai re kui irokiri ke nope ha wa pe shiro ta perihi thare (cha.

irokiri (a type of bird). irokiri.

to burn someone once with a glowing ember. hisikiai.

don't speak angrily to me. yare nowã rayemai mahei.

to speak angrily, to shout at someone. rahu.

to worsen (when a sick person is exposed to the sun for too long), to become hairy (human), to become tomentose (plant). shipei.

as she was afraid, she looked constantly at the sun. a kiri ha mothoka mipraama.

looked constantly. mipraama.

he pushed it with all his strength. ikãri a shei shoaoma.

pushed with all his strength. golihiru.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. 's condition worsened. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall gravely ill. parohai.

the Yawari woman has transformed me, so let my mental faculties change. yãwãriyoma ware shi ha wãrimarini, ya puhi aithaa ta toithipe.

1. Woman belonging to the Yawari people. 2. White or Creole woman, when mentioned during the wayamou ceremony.. yãwãriyoma.

abandoned cultivated field. hikari theka suwe pata.

the Mount Morãmãna that rises near here, at the foot of that mountain, who lives there. h e i morãmãna ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi keki kothe ha, weti ke a wãri roa.

a mountain that rises near here. Morãmãna.

he lay down in his hammock adorned with a transverse line. thoo ke thoku tipruta ha a perikema.

to lie down in a hammock without delay, to lie down for a while. peritou.

to lift, to move a heavy object using a lever. hireprai.

the corn cobs are short. yono mope torohewe.

to be a little long; to have an oblong shape. torohewe.

to fan the fire, to wave at someone by waving an outstretched hand. yahuhai.

to hide an object behind another, to disguise, to conceal by interposing something. shãhokei.

Gather the leaves, we will scatter them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, to spread (durative, plural object). patherimai.

to blow smoke from tobacco into (someone's) mouth and nose. mishiãki kahurei.

to blow smoke from tobacco into the mouth and nose of a woman to force her to breathe a love filter. kahurei.

"you are erring/missing the shots". "wama pe posi hore re waaprapiyekiri".

you are erring/missing the shots. waaprapiyekiri.

I cannot walk fast when the pain I have in my thigh becomes more intense. naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

intermittent pain, pain that becomes more intense at times. poru.

separate in several parts. tikaromai.

to separate into several parts. tikaromai.

the Yanomami dedicate themselves always to committing malevolent acts. alãmi the ki he reshiprou ma re kuti.

to dedicate all the time to sorcery. alãmi.

to stretch, to become loose. prehuaai.

cracked. krãkã.

to be cracked. hãthothoprou.

since you have wives, lie down in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yãhãhe.

variety of peach palm whose fruits turn reddish when ripe. yoararomi.

the dwelling of Yotenama had become silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

don't you realize that I remain silent because of the gossip that you keep spreading. wa the kahiki eemou tapraimi ha totihii, wãno ke pe hiriaprai ha.

to be silent, to stop making noise. eemou.

to enter into a dense vegetation and become completely hidden inside it. hithetheai.

to be hungry. yoyehe.

rubber tree; Couma macrocarpa (Apocynaceae). kãnimãri ãhi.

fruit of this tree. kãnimãri ãshi.

rubber tree. kãnimari.

¿tuviste miedo (hace un rato). wa re kiriraruhe.

you were afraid (a while ago). kiriraruhe.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (talking about the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

relax, loosen, undo. hihop.

set of matches contained in a box. pohoro hiki.

match, matchstick. pohoro.

to heal, to cure. temiprou.

Ardilla trenzó un mapire. karioni yoroﬁ si tiyema (mit.

voy a reparar el chinchorro de algodón (rasgado por el medio). yii ya ki tiyeparei.

atar, coser, zurcir, trenzar, amarrar. tiyeai.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

to gather, to assemble, to group together. kokãã.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw snot). hushiripi.

Tortuga took out an especially dangerous bamboo point. rahaka ãiãmo: tomi pe mamiki ha hararuni (mit.

especially dangerous bamboo point. hararuni.

to make thin, not thick. fepisi.

to make one path lead into another (when opening it). he hamakei.

paint my face red. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint someone. momihiãi.

las mujeres ciertamente verán el mortero (cuando se trituren los huesos de aquéllos que hayamos matado). suwe ke pe wãrini hii ke hi ka mii totihipehe.

mortero en el que se trituran los huesos de los muertos durante la ceremonia paushimou. totihipehe.

spotted, mottled (it). kirishãpi.

spotted, mottled. kirishãpi.

little brother, do not stray from the path, beware of snakes. oãsi, a paatihe, oru ke ki.

do not stray from the path. paatihe.

he took a large stone, as wide as that. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

to widen, to extend (a surface), to expand. rerahaa.

to become viscous or sticky. yoripiai.

walk in a long line (in silence). hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihii.

to become hard like leather, to become deformed (by negligence). prithothai.

I observed that you had given a hammock. amaka ke wa ki ma re hipekenowe thai.

you had given. hipeakenowe.

the Spirits-toucans (hekura), with the beak smeared with a white resin from which hung red cotton, approached me hesitatingly, and I was deceived (I thought they were coming to join me, but they did not). mayepi pe kahiki no warapapi hami matoya ke ki iye hore wekekaimai ha ya hore mirama ma kui.

red cotton. toya.

you spend your time making love with women. suwe wa pe na wati.

while Horonãmi was sleeping, they made love with his wife. horonãmi a mio tehe pe suwepi e na wamahe (mit.

to make love (said by a man). na wai.

to remain seated in a hammock for a long time. tiperayou.

to open a path along a stream. hirirãmai.

to hesitate, to vacillate. rãikiki.

although it is briefly first I will inform you, open your ears you who carry a bird skin on your back. onohowe ma kui, the ã hoã wea pariparei, siki re yehipoimi yimika thaa ta pariri.

briefly, for a short time. pariparei.

to put a short stick in a prolongation. hoshokoreprai.

his two husbands stayed behind. pe heãropi e kipi re hewekeiwei.

his/her two sons were shamans; his/her two husbands stayed behind. kuraoma.

the noise is moving away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to diminish gradually (noise, voice). nashiprou.

their corpses were strewn on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

they found the black-painted sorcerers strewn (dead) on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

to scatter, spread, strew on the ground. tikukou.

Yoawe turned over (in his hammock). yoawe e mi re hatuprariyowei.

to turn over, to roll over. hatuprariyowei.

don't lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

father. fape.

to sit or squat for a while in the central plaza. rotapei.

when I was a young man I used to offer many objects (= I was generous). ya huyao tehe matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

young man, person of male sex apt for procreation. huyao.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to have something to accompany a food. tehiapou.

to cure oneself (when one is a shaman). nohi reo.

to cure oneself. nohi reo.

we start running again and we approach quickly. yamaki rereai kuaai kooheri ha, yetu ke yamaki titetetariyoma.

we approach quickly. titetetariyoma.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a beast that was chasing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to leave behind, to exceed (in quantity, length), to go beyond a limit. torerayou.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied one higher than the other. mi wereheo.

to have one side higher than the other, to be unbalanced (canoe). wereh.

sit here. heha a ta roiku.

Sloth came down and sat immediately slowly. shimiyeteopewe a ha ithoruni a opi roa shoakema.

to sit, to be seated. warama.

I slipped in the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

I said to myself: "while they roll down here, I will kill them". "eyeha ke pe wãri kahehou tehe ya pe waikai totihiowe", ya ha kuni.

to slide, to slip, to precipitate down a slope. kahei.

1. to bend, to fold under weight. 2. fissure.. yashoa.

by means of what. weti hami the re kuini.

by means of what?. ¿mediante.

the light of the glowworm or firefly, its phosphorescence. famakuri wake.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe (cha.

glowworm; firefly. famakuri.

move slowly downstream in a line (bird of prey). pe opi ta katipokiri.

march in a line, approach the shore. katipokiri.

they threw the feather case, they transformed it into a pava rajadora, and then dawn came in the house. karaha si ha sheyerini, si ha mãrãshipramariheni, pe he harua shoapema.

they transformed it into a pava rajadora (a type of bird) and then dawn came. mãrãshipramariheni.

to arrive at mixing with people from another community. koyokoprou.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (he has no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

we will not go on a visit (he and I). kamiye hamamou mai ke the.

to go on a visit to another community. hamamou.

to soften, to crumble, to collapse, to bend, to sway, to lean. krããhã.

I live upriver. ya peria oraa.

we went down to the water a little farther upriver. yamaki ithoa orahakema.

to be upriver; to be at the front of a canoe. ihete.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed when falling to the ground (a single object). tikuhai.

he put me next to a thick tree like this, like this, with my arms pressed against my body (the speaker imitates the gesture), he also made me as small as he could. e naha kuwe the hi ha ya hiririoma, wãisipi yokokowe ya kuoma.

with the arms pressed against the body or gathered on the chest. hiririoma.

I'm going to establish my garden upriver. ora ha ke ya rii hikarimorãyou.

to be working in the garden. hikari-mo-u.

pole at the end of the roof to keep the last row of braided leaves in place. an en la extremidad del techo para mantener en su sitio la última hilera de hojas trenzadas.

pole. an.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

1. To make someone absorb a malefic substance (h e r i) by mixing it with food; to feed a hekura by offering ami u. 2. To take medication orally (neol.). koa.

sound produced by a wooden object when it is struck several times at regular intervals. krehemou.

although it is new (the knife), it does not cut much. a ma tutewei a peheri namomi.

although, despite. tutewei.

to have grown beard. kaweirayou.

wild plants/animals in a cultivated field. hikari therimi.

(He) is shaving with a knife. pe weshiki pata hoo.

to shave, shave oneself. ho.

you will not make me be killed by the hekura. yare pesi yehiai mai ke the (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to make someone be killed by the hekura (during a ceremonial speech). koiai.

throw away the empty chinchorros (of the hekura that have left), inhale hallucinogens, let the shamans trace a new path (for the hekura) and you will become heavy again (= the hekura will return to lodge in your body). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei (cha.

to become heavy; to regain the hekura spirits and thereby gain weight and power (for a shaman). hutea.

to paint several motifs, to paint motifs over the entirety of a surface. yãhirimai.

to leave someone with their hand extended without taking what they offer (because one is angry or feels hatred). imiki totomapou.

to leave someone with their hand extended without taking what they offer (because one is angry or feels hatred). totomapou.

suck in your belly. a mi ta wãhetaru.

to suck in the belly. wãhetaru.

thus, I attack upon arrival. ihi re ya kea shoapeherou.

they piled them near Horonãmi upon arrival. horonãmi re iha e pe hirapraai yaimou re kupeherouwei.

to attack upon arrival. shoapeherou.

you see well that these machetes have truncated blades (are bad and old). hei sipara pe ma re fematha totihii.

truncated, amputated, cut off. fematha.

to start crushing a soft object with the foot; to start stepping on a dangerous object. karukuprai.

to be startled. kirioprou.

they quickly tied torches and waved them in front of themselves as they moved. kai ke wake pe ha okãokãtaarariheni pe yãikoherima.

they quickly tied torches and waved them in front of themselves as they moved. okãokãtaarariheni.

to go from one side to the other. hatahatamou.

They (two) spread epidemics over a vast region. no wãri a aka praukumapii shoaoma.

to widen, expand, become spacious. hauhu.

to kill a male person. frahaka hãwete.

(one day) you will hear it said that we have killed some of our enemies (lit. "rafaka re pe hãwetekema fa tharei", wamaki yimika kuu totihiope.

to shake lightly and laterally a bamboo tip to remove it from the arrow shaft in which it is inserted. hãwetãr.

it turns out that, while they were walking, they stuck the big stone perpendicularly (into the ground). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe.

to put the head between the shoulders; to plant, fix, stick in, prick; to fix an object perpendicularly to another; to hook a fishing line to the bottom of the water. pasu.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. poshoshotamakini.

they had fun, they participated in the presentation dance. the ki iriamoma, the pe praiama.

to participate in the presentation dance. praiama.

to have a swollen belly. hihathomai.

to decorate totally several objects with crosses. yakirararei.

when I fell again after jumping over a water hole, I stepped on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

Depression or hole in the ground where rainwater accumulates. hawathokoma.

the ancestors multiplied and became more numerous. porepore ke ki re parai totihionowei (mit.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco. nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma.

1. (verb intransitive) to multiply, proliferate; to spread, propagate; to intensify (pain). 2. (verb transitive) to cause to multiply; to propagate, spread; to aggravate pain. para.

there is honey upriver (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

upriver, there where there is a sandbank. mrakatahu a re prapohori ha.

the monkey rests (upwards, in a tree). pasho a wãshimi horupohori.

upriver, upwards. -pohoru.

they are in good health everywhere. temi the pe hiraprawe.

there is blood scattered on the ground. iyeiye re pe nohi hirawe kui.

to be gathered, to be together, to live in different places. hiraprawe.

to think of something else. shomirariyo.

he slept a long time ago. yetu ha a mikeherima.

he slept a long time ago. mikeherima.

I am afraid. mãyãhãri umo.

to be afraid. mãyãhãri.

we set out, we got going. yamaki ha huroherini.

we set out, we got going. huroherini.

to introduce the finger. shereka naka tipetai.

to introduce. tipetai.

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. hushomiprou.

"his/her animal/pet attacked the fierce beast there". "thãriyeni yaro a waitheri re shurukuapiyei".

his/her animal/pet. thãriyeni.

to make a longitudinal mark, to scratch someone, to cut someone, to damage a roof with a machete blow from above (longitudinally in relation to the petioles of the leaves that cover the roof). yakekek.

indicates a recent past, within the same day. ku-prei.

short (animal, plant). horotoprawe.

it was a very good hunting dog and it pursued the tapirs. hiima ke a suhirina, shama ke pe waiamai re totihiowei.

why is it that the chiggers always choose to lodge under the toenails. weti the ha hihu na peni yare mamisi pe no hore waiaprai ayao.

it is him whom I decided to kill. ya waiamar e m a.

1. To persist; to pursue. 2. To refuse, prohibit. 3. To choose a victim (human or animal predator).. waiamar.

the antepasado of the fixed eyes (having just been skinned) sank into the Maharapiwei river. maharapiwei u ha poreri a mamoku royokowe kepariyoma.

river name. Maharapiwei.

to be tired (perfective aspect). motarayou.

I will obtain (a hammock) in exchange for this object. ei the ki ha ya ki ruruape.

to obtain (an object) in exchange, to trade. ruruape.

to separate to live in two dwellings situated close to each other. poamai.

al llegar a su casa, los rodeamos inmediatamente. yama pe he hãyoprai shoarayoma.

to surround, to encircle (enemies or animals) in small separated groups; to be about to encircle. hãyomorayou.

I'm going to get my head shaved by my older brother. ãiwe ke iha ya he mãrokoshipram o u.

to get one. mãrokoshipram.

to shed skin (person). ukukuo.

to have a swollen foot. shekeke.

both (of them) made Rahararitawe run back and forth crying from thirst. rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama.

to run from one side to another, to go back and forth. rara.

don't cry (to the dead). pe ikii mai pe ta kuo.

to cry, to weep. ikii.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to crush, grind, soften with the hand. hushikiãi.

to hold in place with the foot. katetepou.

my brother (the deceased) was a good tapir hunter. ãiwe a no wãri hayakoaripi.

we will drink the water of the tapir waterfalls. hayakoari ke yama pe porapi koaiwe.

tapir. hayakoari.

the mother kept her daughter seated next to her. pe niini pe thee ke the hore tikemapou aheteoma.

to invite someone to come to one. tikemapou.

to make slippery. takramai.

I go to your house (towards you). kahe ke iha ya huu.

It is to you that I speak. kahe ke iha ya wã hai.

to, towards, in the direction of. iha.

to make (someone) run. freremai.

they climbed (the mountain) and, while climbing, Kasima felt vertigo. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a V.

to feel dizzy or vertigo. kirihotayoma.

al venir aquí hice un rodeo para evitar a la gente Arimawe. ãrimawe theri ke iha ya e ma re ãyoikiyohe.

no se les ocurra ir a atacar al anciano que vive en Arimawe. ãrimawe theri pata a wai re kui, a wãhã wayoai puhi topraotihehe.

a place name. ãrimawe.

the tábanos have the sucking beak flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to have become, to have been, or to be flat at one point and nowhere else. tatahaa.

Õmawe advanced crouched (so as not to be seen), and crouched down. Õmawe a ha teretereikuni, a yerekema.

the place where the monster was crouched. ihiru pei koroku ha ha kema.

to crouch, to squat, to lie down, to be in a crouched position. rekema.

to get up from a hammock. fithão.

let the tobacco grow well, especially do not dry the leaves of very small plants. isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai.

to leave something to grow well, to let something grow properly. totihironi.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the screaming piha (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

screaming piha (bird). hãihãiyomi.

to place vertically, to put vertical. yororãmai.

bent branch. hii poko tishakoa.

to hang a hammock between two posts (or two trees) too close to each other (the hammock then forms too pronounced an arc). tishoko.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to descend vertically. wahohoi.

the man from Tayari destroyed the wasp nest by hitting it repeatedly with the palm of his hand. imikini tayari theri kopina pe re sheprarirahei.

to break, crush a round object by hitting it repeatedly with another object. sheprarirahei.

When the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to become deformed, hardened, twisted, wrinkled. toshesheai.

the fierce beast approached rapidly. yaro ke a pata re ikuikutakeiwei (mit.

to approach rapidly, to direct oneself swiftly towards. ikuikutakei.

to have allowed the meat to start rotting (through negligence). thopokopirayou.

place yourself at the front of the canoe. a ta oraiku.

to be or place oneself at the front of a canoe; to walk at the head. oraiku.

ennegrecer (voluntariamente) un objeto exponiéndolo al humo. shipimai.

our relations in the past were friendly and I don't stop thinking that they still are. yaheki rimimayou parioma, yaheki nohimayou tao ya puhi kuuwei ke the.

to establish good relations with someone (reciprocal). rimimayou.

they participated in the ceremonial nocturnal dialogue, and at dawn, they exchanged goods. pe wayamoma, matohi pe ãhã pou henaomahe.

to dialogue. wayamomai.

null. rikirikimi.

he arrived without weapons, he had lost his arrows. mãroko a kopema, shereka ke ki a ha hoyarini (mit.

he. mãroko.

I will come when the day begins to decrease. the mi shinayuãi tehe ya hupe.

after the fall of the sun. shinayurayou.

we will kill our enemy (lit. pehe a he wãri ira kaoa totihiparei.

to kill someone by drowning them (lit. to put someone. totihiparei.

palm (unidentified plant). shitipa.

have you not observed it. wama a no wãri ta tarehaw e.

to observe, to notice. tarehaw.

the ancestor ran crying towards the house and also it can be The word 'poreri' in Yanomami means 'to laugh'. poreri pe miã kãi rerepeherima.

ancestor. poreri.

to take, to obtain. pãyerekerei.

I will go upriver and come back to eat nai flowers. ora hami ke ya ha kuraherini, nai ke ya wai koope.

I will go upriver and come back to eat nai flowers. kuraherini.

his shoulders. he pasukei.

shoulders. pasukei.

1. Walk carelessly, without looking around, often with the gaze turned towards the ground. 2. Bend, twist under the effect of a load. Lean the head to receive the blow of an adversary. teio.

noise of a fart when the buttocks are wet. praririmou.

to mix, to join with people from another community. nikerepramou.

to become fluid, to fluidify. hereshiai.

to go. hite.

to become longer than. rapahaprou.

disappointed. hushukei.

while Jaguar lay on the ground breathing with difficulty, they (two) went back down (from the tree). irariwe ke a hethekou mao tehe, a wãri prao tehe, ke kipi hithoa ha koruni.

to breathe with difficulty. hethekou.

they harvest Indian cane leaves by breaking them off with their fingers. komishi henape yeriihe.

to harvest, to pick by breaking off with the fingers, to gather tobacco leaves in that manner. yerirei.

put both hands (to receive it), it's a boy (who is being born). pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke a hoã (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

put both hands (to receive something). porakaiku.

to soften several objects. epehamai.

to soften. epeh.

the water hinders their advance but they set foot on land again. mau ke u ha a shi wãripariyo kuhe, a hashiria re kokeheriiwei.

we set foot on land, we immediately set off, and our line stretches out. yamaki ha hashiriikuni, yamaki re hirihiã re shoarayouwei.

to get out of the water, to set foot on land (from a canoe). hashirio.

as it was night, those who went hunting shouted to be fetched. the pe rãmi re huonowei, the mi ka supre ha:"wamare ta koreyo she", pe komima.

it is night, it is dark. supre ha.

in each occasion the ancestors used to let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

they used to let escape. tokupraamanowehei.

to set up to spend the night, to build a temporary shelter. perimou: instalarse para pasar la noche, construir un refugio temporal.

to place, to put. huwe.

to open a path along a stream. hirirãmai.

to acquire the shape of a short loaf; to elongate a little. torohai.

no cerrar el ojo en toda la noche. hewakara.

imitate, parody, mimic someone; measure (the length of something), evaluate (a quantity), count. owe-.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to reach the summit. pororoprou.

to wrinkle the forehead (perfective). riikikei.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

to stretch the neck repeatedly. katitaai.

arrange the logs in a star shape around the fire. koã ãshoku titete.

arrange in star shape. titete.

I will make a cotton ball and take it, you will ask for it. ya nathe fa thaprarini, ya nathe kãi fa yaﬁrini, wa nakouwe.

cotton ball. thaprarini.

although I don't have matches, I don't intend to work to get them (lit. ya ma horimou tehe, "pohoroye ya hiki no ohote ta thaa sho", ya kuu mai.

to have the desire to work, to be busy working. ohota.

to tap on a termite nest with the hand in order to make the termites fall on someone's head and bite them, for fun. he yoothomapei.

to tap on a termite nest with the hand in order to make the termites fall on someone. yoothomapei.

to place, to put. tirere-.

to gather standing. shiriki.

he went down again (along the tree trunk). the ithoa theri ha kothoherini.

sit down (at the foot of the tree, the speaker is perched on it). a ta rotho.

to go down, to descend. kuthoheri.

(related word). shãroko.

to adopt a form. toroheai.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been fixed (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie tightly with many turns, to secure firmly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. hatetekei.

they left me on the banks of the Amiushiwe river, downstream. Amiushiwe u ha, koro u ha, yare kãi re kupariyowehei.

river name. Amiushiwe.

(he) tied the legs of the tapir two by two (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie two legs together (of an animal, to carry it on one. warekei.

to give a crab to a man following the unokai ritual to gnaw on. washishiprai.

to crush or gnaw completely with the incisors. washishai.

to rise (the day). uheheprou.

to become short. homotoprou.

to kick. kaisiai.

ceremonial dialogue. tetetewe.

poorly formed or sparse bunch of banana and/or peach palm. fmashishipi ke ki.

sparse, thin (plants, hair); said when the tubers of a yam plant are not abundant. fmashishipi ke ki: poorly formed or sparse bunch of banana and/or peach palm. fmashishipi.

they threw numerous personal objects. matohi pruka a hoyaremahe (mit.

in the stomach the ashes of the dead swell (after ingesting them in a banana compote during a funeral ceremony). pei pusi hami matohi the pe huruu totih i w e.

your cursed arrows hit their target perfectly. wamaki wãri hore matohipi niyao totihioma ma re kui.

personal belongings, possessions (excluding cotton and feminine objects); the bones of an incinerated corpse; weapons (arrows, bamboo tips or poisons), the heri and everything that serves to kill. hoyaremahe.

rehoai: to lie on one's belly when lying down. rehoai: ponerse sobre el vientre cuando uno está acostado.

to lie on one. rehoai.

headdress of the hekura that resembles mist. watoshe ihirashi.

(se supo luego que) él había visitado todos los peñascos de la región. wa mape no heteprai shoarayou ta no kureshini (mit.

peñascos de la región. kureshini.

even the axes of the macaw people had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be locally damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekeheãi.

Prueheyoma (them) cursed immediately. prueheyoma a hirai shoaoma.

to curse, to swear. peyeprai.

the large carrying basket is gray like the earth. wii ke a pata mimou koshi: el gran canasto de carga está gris como la tierra.

gray, earth-colored, stained with earth. kroke.

Brother, they twisted/wrenched my arms. apawe yare poko re ãihiprariherihe ye.

to twist/wring many objects partially. ãihiãkei.

to break it in two. wenikiprai.

to change one. kuyetaai.

to get something dirty by passing through it frequently. acostummai.

los retoños de plátano son pequeños. kuratha sipe oshe.

brote nuevo, planta sembrada desde hace poco tiempo. puberula.

in each occasion, and in different places, he made the vine jump into pieces cutting it with his nails. pei ke imisikini e thoku hematha yutuataramai kupariyoma.

he did it in different places, he cut it into pieces with his nails. yutuataramai.

to fabricate an oblong object. torohamai.

I have a fish bone stuck in my throat. ya the hããrema.

to have a fish bone stuck in the throat. hããrema.

the child climbed the tree and shook a branch several times. ihiru ke a wai ha torereidukuni, hii poko raekama.

to shake (once). aeke.

our relations in the past were friendly and I don't stop thinking that they still are. yaheki rimimayou parioma, yaheki nohimayou tao ya puhi kuuwei ke the.

to establish good relations with someone. rimimai.

to thicken a liquid, to prepare a thick liquid. huteprai.

to be in plain sight, to be in a place where one is visible. fwaweto ha(mi).

to be visible, to be in plain sight. fwaweto.

it refers to a man's deceased wife (lit. fshikãpi re thãrimionowei.

the one who kept him company in the shikã (the area under the roof at the back of a dwelling). fshikãpi.

(habla de río arriba). fitho.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much, intensifier. eparoho.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. yorikotii.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

to become white. auhou.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

to install oneself to spend the night, to build a temporary shelter. perimou.

fabricate an oblong object. torohekei.

he/she did not eat. a iyanomi.

he/she did not eat. iyanomi.

to become vertical. wapo.

Õmawe advanced crouching so as not to be seen and quickly found himself close (to the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei (mit.

to suddenly bend down (e.g., under a heavy load or to go unnoticed). terekeprakei.

the woman who disappeared from her younger brother's hearth. hei pe oshe e re kui ha ãshi nohi re mraaiwei.

your younger brother (or younger male cousin) of the same sex (male or female speaker). oshehe.

to try repeatedly, to keep trying. wapetaai.

I am no longer a little child (humorous antithesis, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

little bird that is starting to grow feathers. makamakapi.

some mature men came (or went) to visit. prowehe the pe hamamoma.

some mature men came to visit. hamamoma.

I go to get wood with others. koã ya ãsho narei.

to obtain. narerei.

to wrinkle, crease or crumple locally. rukuru.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to stay behind, to remain when others leave; to constitute a remainder. heikio.

(funny): to eat quickly like that. krãrikrãrimou.

1. to gnaw, to eat a crunchy food [krãrikrãrimou (funny): to eat quickly like that]. 2. crunchy. krãri.

I spoke in a low voice, without shouting (without force), I was not heard. ikãri mrai, ya wã hiriprou ma re mraoprei.

to speak in a low voice, without shouting (without force), not to be heard. mraoprei.

she accompanied Toucan to his house. mayepiriwe ke e yahi hami a nokarema.

to accompany. nokakei.

while Anteater was turning around in circles, the woman was the first to carry out a trade with a given community. shokou hoo tehe, poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriimaprou.

to be the first to carry out a trade or commercial exchange with a given person or community. shomaprou.

to prepare a large quantity of food, to give in large quantities. prekei.

I pull the vines (to break them). thoo ya thotho ikokai.

to pull down, to force down. ikutaai.

to damage or bend the edge of a sharp instrument. pruekeãmai.

to be having someone paint a curved line on one. hiporoshimamou.

the hekura were about to kill her in an instant. hekura peni a mori shea roparema.

I won't do anything to you (lit: I won't hit you). pe shei mai ke the.

to hit; to kill. shei.

I am really worried about those two. ya kipi nohi haruhupou totihio.

to come to feel concern for someone, to fear for someone. rai.

the bird horãma (that accompanies their breaths) has just sung. horãma ke e wãri kutariyoma.

a type of bird. horãma.

to go around in circles, to describe circles. katitihu.

desplácense en ﬁla (y silenciosamente), como los chácharos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to align, to line up. shani-.

fue al encuentro de Siroromi, lo agarró y lo arrojó al fuego. siroromi re a yãkão mi ha paoni koa wake ha a sheyepema.

él llevó tizones. koa wake ki re tetaoheriiwei.

tizón. sheyepema.

to emerge. ururuwe.

(he/she/it) surfaced. kapokoo.

to surface, to come up. kapoko.

the herd of peccaries is near here; the hosts have asked that you be the one to recite the opening formula (of the feast). ke ki hiraa kure: la manada de váquimino, los anﬁtriones han pedido que seas tú quien recite la fórmula de apertura (de la ﬁesta).

herd of peccaries (a type of wild pig). váquimino.

he will give me a piece of his lechosa and also it can be The word 'shamakoro' in Yanomami means 'tobacco (synonym of shama)'. shamakoro a hakokopei.

lechosa (type of fruit). shamakoro.

far, distant. payeke.

to sway in a hammock. kayeri.

to sway. kayeri.

to undulate, to wave (surface of water). senisenimou.

to become stiff or rigid due to effort (perfective form of the inceptive verb). hirararayou.

he advanced calling out. a komii kuaaherima.

after resting completely, he began to call out again. a wãshimi horua ha haikitaaruni, a komii kooma.

to call out, to shout. komii.

extinguish the roof fire by throwing water on it. mãu ke uni hei yaa ke si wake misi ta rumakihe.

extinguish (a fire). rumakihe.

to gather in a group, to agglutinate; to cause a slight inflammation. shimokorerei.

la diadema y el algodón rojo la ponían espléndida. mathono peni the no aimoma.

splendid, magnificent. mathono.

1. to start swaying (an object planted in the ground), 2. to shake an object planted in the ground, to pull it out or to verify if it is firmly embedded. hãwekeãi.

to line up for a moment. wirinatou.

tree. huriã anahi.

tree, bird. huriã.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment when they reached the summit of the Gallineta mountain. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe (mit.

to reach the summit, to move along a ridge. pororo.

justo encima de nosotros se encontraban dos gallinetas encaramadas una junto a la otra. pei yamaki hetupi ha hãshimo ke kipi he t i p e t e o m a.

las almas bailaron unas tras otras. porepore pe praiai mi hetuoma (mit.

one after another, in succession. hetupi.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put one. rerekeo.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to heal, to get better, to improve (health condition). manaheãi.

a lechosa totally chopped into pieces. shamakoro hakaroma no.

to visit during a journey several communities located in the same region. yare tiraatarai vb.

resultative suffix. hete.

the great jejenes exterminated the Yanomami, they ate them all. peti nakini yãse nomãmi the ki waa hititiararema, the ki haikiprarema.

they exterminated them all, they ate them all. rárema.

null. mishimishi.

to have a foreign body lodged between the eye and the eyelid. mamo ripupiprou.

to have a foreign body lodged between the eye and the eyelid. ripupiprou.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to be doing this (of lining up side by side). rãyomou.

do not go to look at those pijiguaos (do not go to steal their fruits). hei rasha siki re kui, siki mitihehe.

to not touch, to not steal. fmi.

the jaguar was threatening. tototi pe pemoma.

to be threatening or menacing. tototi.

as they were numerous they were busy down on the ground. pe the pe mathe ha the pe ohotaa ha yaithoni: thomipi na.

numerous. thethewe.

I will exterminate everything that lives in this region. ya the urihi si ahiaiwe.

1. To ask someone to cool something down. 2. To put in the shade; to let (a very hot food) cool down. To kill (lit.: to make cold).. ahiamai.

to massage oneself for a moment. hutetetou.

the men were already far away, they had already set up camp. the pe peria waikikema.

the lizard had already hidden (under something). sharaima aka si poa waikikema.

they were already far away, they had already set up camp. waikikema.

to become less and less visible in the darkness. waroshou.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

thin palm wood arrow with the tip hardened in the fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. tiheherari.

"we will make the house again as it was before", they said. "e naha pema nahi thaa kopei", the pe kuprarou yaioma.

we (inclusive). pema.

no terminar de decir lo que se quería decir. t wã kuyetou.

to not finish saying what one wanted to say. kuyetou.

to go back and forth several times to transport objects from a canoe to land. hashiripraamai.

to receive something that has been taken in a certain way. hukerarei.

it is clearly distinguished (noise, voice), it is heard clearly. wã yawereai.

to be clearly distinguished (noise, voice), to be heard clearly. yawereai.

to graze, to scrape. tiki.

when a woman complies with the ritual of her first menstruation, her husband also does it. suwe a yipimou tehe pe heãropi sho.

ritual performed after a woman. paushimo.

to receive from a person an object that this person has obtained from another. piyemapei.

ay, they (the hekura) were strangling me. ware a orãmi shiã re tikoparirei.

they (the hekura) were strangling me. tikoparirei.

we quickly blacken our faces with charcoal and, with our nails, we draw wavy lines on that dyed background. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

charcoal. ishiishi.

I don. patahamarima.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. eyeha ke ware wãri yeﬁi, pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

nuca. tuyeai.

he approached quickly to the place where the ashes of the cremated body were. oshohore ke ki no preope hami.

approached, came near. preope.

as he felt no resistance, he inserted his penis between the pubic hairs (of the woman). the prore ha koikoi pe ha the moroshi epehetou re shoarayouwei.

pubic hair. koikoi.

down feather. osheoshepi.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

to pronounce the invitation speech during a feast, or to respond to it. teshomomou.

thotho. wãkowãkoma.

leaves submerged in water and agitated by the current with a permanent swaying motion. shetashetamou.

pus. niyoniyo.

there, they metamorphosed, they transformed into supernatural beings in front of themselves. yãiki iha wa pe pruka yairariyoma ta no thare.

they metamorphosed, they transformed into supernatural beings. yairariyoma.

they fled to the forest (to take shelter from the disease). urihi hami pe tokurayoma.

the otter escaped immediately. proro ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to flee, escape, run away. toku.

The handsome Fox (hoari) wanted to eat honey oi. Zorro guapán (hoari) quiso comer miel oi.

honey. oi.

we will come to visit. pemaki hamamope.

we will come to visit. hamamope.

to let a fire go out, to let it extinguish little by little (by ceasing to feed it). wãnonomakei.

come here, get closer to her. eyemi ke a ta ahetetaru.

the váquiros are near here. ahete ha ke pe ki hiraa kurai.

to approach, to get closer. ahetetaru.

he consumed all the tobacco. pee nahe mi watheprarema.

Hoo had eaten his brains completely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema (mit.

consumed completely, devoured entirely. watheprarema.

intestinal worms. hígasherereamo.

move away. a ta prahari.

they traveled a long distance. pe praharayoherima.

to move away, to distance oneself. prahari.

to do (tobacco) quickly. tihirutihirutai.

to keep the memory of. ihipipou.

only a specific place has been burned. the ishikema.

only a specific place or area has been burned. ishikema.

the man was in the middle of many termites that were piled up inside the hammocks hung close together. osheri ke pe yayomope hami yãnomãmi ke the re nikerepariyonowei.

to be piled up on top of each other in a dwelling. yayomou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco river). pita.

the attribute of the hekura (rihu u) was about to come to me, but since I did not stay still, it went back. rihu uni ya nape mori ithou he yatiokirioma, kamiye ke ya he ha reshiproni a he tatokema.

to move around, to be occupied in various places at once. reshii.

Baba tenía costumbre de ir a cocer los paquetes de orugas a la selva. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

to make cocer (cook). ripiprai.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take a bit of tobacco from one. hakokei.

to cover an object or hide it behind something to prevent theft. shãhotaai.

the onoto dye was mixed with bark to perfume it, that's why it's shiny. fei nana pe e no kapino, e no kapino fa totiﬁoni, ei re e noshi tererewe.

perfumed onoto dye. kapino.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

you will make me fall into the water. ya kepariyoma.

to fall into water. kepariyo.

return. fpeki.

we will really attack that one. nashomi pehe a wãri shaipou yaio.

1. To make an object move by dragging it along the ground. 2. To be at war (ceremonial dialogue); to attack someone.. shaipou.

I am afraid. miorewe ke ki.

to be afraid. miorewe.

to make viscous, to make sticky. yoripimarei.

to have scratched with the nails the red spots left by gnats, to have had this done by someone else. tisika no.

to scratch with the nails to remove the red spots caused by gnats. tisikai.

to have yellow urine (which is generally interpreted as a sign of illness or as a manifestation of old age). fniaasi koirapi.

to have yellow urine (interpreted by the Yanomami as a sign of poor health or senility). fniaasi frãre.

to feel the need to urinate. fniaasi ihe.

to start urinating, to be urinating. niaasi keyeo.

to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, a sick person or an elderly person to urinate. niaasi keyemai.

urine. fniaasi.

let's go there to knock down my pijiguaos with a stick. ipa rasha peheki ta rekeatu.

mine. rekeatu.

shrub, guachamacá, Bonafousia tetrastachys (Apocynaceae). Its fruit is edible.. tetrastachys.

a young girl who was confined because she had her first period, left her enclosure unnoticed. utu chacha que estaba encerrada porque había tenido las primeras reglas, salió de su reducto sin ser notada.

a young girl who has had her first menstruation. chacha.

(myth): it curled up to jump, it went up high, it went to the sky. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to become hard like leather, to shrivel up; to curl up on oneself. pusutukei.

to crush and grind with the fingers. tihuai.

a skilled honey gatherer. hutosi.

they burn one after another. pe ishioprou.

to burn one after another, to burn at the same time. ishioprou.

he skinned it immediately while it was squealing in vain. a si yoai re shoapariyonowei a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

he skinned it immediately. shoapariyonowei.

he is beautiful (or: she is beautiful). a koshãpi.

beautiful. koshãpi.

Shapo konayoma (a female spirit) sat near me farting. shapo konayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, a shiã keyeheroma (cha.

sat. sentó.

to roll up a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokore.

the feathers of the crested curassow surround the base of its spear points, observe them well. pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

to surround, to go around. okoro.

to be soft, tender, flexible. epehewe.

woman. ani.

there are many beautiful tobacco plants (one next to the other). pee nahe pata riyehewe yorukou tharei.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are crowded together there one against the other (= catch knife fish, roast them inside those leaves that are crowded together there one against the other, and then lick the juice from the roast that comes out of them). waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to grow in large quantities, to sprout in large quantities, to let weeds invade crops (through negligence), to stand in large quantities close together forming a compact mass. yorukai.

others had placed the horizontal rods at the back of the future dwelling. ai peni nahi pe hehã theikema.

to place horizontal rods at the back of a future dwelling. theikema.

they abandoned the path to hunt paujíes and obtain feathers for their arrows. pe rãmi paokei, paruri imisi pe kãi niya ha niyaheni.

to hunt paujíes (birds) and obtain feathers for arrow fletching. niyaheni.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakamai.

to describe a curve. hipoye.

make them have sex, their children will be good hunters (or good warriors). pe ta wamomahe, pe pe ihirupi nihitaprope.

to predict that a person will become skilled at archery or shooting. nihitaprope.

to lie down one next to another, one behind the other. hohãthãpraai.

to scratch oneself by rubbing against. mãrikio.

to amplify (noise, voice). nakreai.

I will not change my mind, I will invite you. mai ke the, pe nakaaiwe.

I will invite you. nakaaiwe.

the ashes of the dead swell in the stomach (after being ingested). pei pusi hami matohi the pe huruu totihiwe.

I was in ambush, no one came, and a whistling call was heard. ya reoma, the pe kuproimi ha pe the pe husi heã petariyo kurei.

1. To swell, dilate 2. To hide underground to transform into chrysalids (caterpillars); to swim upstream during the rainy season (fish). huru.

the conuco was no longer producing, they prepared wapu fruits and consumed them with water. the pe no oheo ke tehe, wapu ke a ha thaheni u pe koamahe.

to be in famine, to be in a period when the conuco (crop field) produces almost nothing. oheo.

that the demons of the morning hurry up (lit. waikana theri pe shi ta hariprarukiri.

to be impatient; to hurry, to rush. shi hari.

to lie down face down on the floor (in a hammock, on a branch, etc.). yarehotou.

if you kill me, you will have a fierce demon spirit in your chest because of me. kamiyeni ke yare niyaprarema wa pariki no ãiãmopi uprapariyo.

to be possessed by the spirit of a fierce demon and become ferocious like it. ãiãmopi.

to make someone return a borrowed object. komakei.

slightly thick or pasty consistency (like yogurt), an intermediate state between fluid and thick (referring to a liquid). thepehewe.

there is a bee nest (that has honey) stuck to the trunk of a still small motua tree. kiha oi ke pe yetea kupiyerei, motua oshetiwe ke hi ha.

to be ambushed, to be stuck to. yetekewe.

despite the lack of food, I grate a little cassava and thus manage to eat. nashi ya wai ha hirikikini ya kaihou shoatakei.

to be in that position, to be located there. shoatakei.

the people of toucans began to take a liking to the plantations of arrow canes. mayepiri peni shereka ki nohi toamahe.

began to appreciate, took a liking to. toamahe.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw snot). hushihipiprou.

to lengthen. rapakei.

to extinguish a fire. koa wake sheteke.

fruit. wãtemo.

the young people never stay still. huya the pe yãnikio ma re mai.

to be calm, to stop going from one place to another, to stop agitating uselessly. yãnikou.

to pass over the fire (durative). shãishãimai.

to begin to surpass (in height). torehai.

what is it that burned there, in the place where the ground is covered (with leaves). kihi weti ke the rii yaoma the he re yohopiyei.

covered (by leaves). yohopiyei.

to support a canoe under construction by placing logs on its edges. paihiprai.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to carry something above one. mojen.

I took the fish out of the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

to take something out of a canoe. hashiriakei.

to get help. payerimamou.

to get help. payerimamou.

to cause the surface of the water to tremble. rahurahumomai.

tomorrow I will leave. pruebe; henaha ke ya hupe.

tomorrow. pruebe.

preparó una mascada. nahe ha tetareni.

mascada (wad of tobacco). tetareni.

to take a split tobacco leaf for oneself following the central vein. pee nahe repokosirei.

to take a leaf split in that way for oneself. repokosirei.

to have placed long objects next to each other (perfective of waririmai). waririmakei.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk in the water (plural subject). iroiromou.

ripuhusirimi. ripuhusirimi.

put yourself in the center. a mi ta thar i p r a r u.

to stay for a moment in the center. hariprou.

the pava rajadora was at the top of the tree (and was not visible). mãrãshi a yaokokema.

to be at the top of a tree (an animal being hunted). ushi.

the man is angry. wariomi koheki.

to be angry. koheki.

they advanced towards me with their gaze fixed on the ground, looking for my footprints. pe the mi teateapraroimai kuperei, yare mãyo taeihe ha.

to walk with one. teateamou.

fibers. made.

fibers. made-.

when you have a nightmare, the one who makes you have a strange feeling is the spirit of dreams. wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi ahimari.

to feel bad (physically or psychologically), to be without energy, to have a clouded mind; to be abnormally distracted or imprudent. ahiai.

to miss someone, to feel sadness for the absence of a loved one. iyoo.

ancestor of mythology, contributed to the dissemination of tobacco. teshoriwe.

serpiente, sapa, mapanare (falsa). severus.

the food of the hekura makes you lose strength. hekura re pe nini wa uhutuai totihia.

to soften, to make soft or flexible. uhutu.

to make a place impenetrable (by accumulation of felled trees). rasisiamai.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

ice. peni.

deform, become hard like leather, twist. totihii1.

give me a bamboo tip, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to do it with a basket (the deceased is a woman). wii no kãi preaprarou.

to raise and lower the arms. yoko.

He has wavy or curly hair. Uu shi wãrihi ama.

to have wavy or curly hair. shi wãrihi.

luego tienes que colocar varios leños por encima. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

to be placed on top of each other. makeprawe.

to start helping. payeriprai.

For the rain to stop, the children or women chant the following: "prararaiku, prararaiku. Para que pare la lluvia los niños o las mujeres canturrean lo siguiente: "prararaiku, prararaiku. ". ".

to make the rain diminish in intensity. prararaiku.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

to launch over, to throw higher than. morokomarei.

to break, to crush. karesheai.

to receive a tobacco wad prepared by folding and pressing tobacco leaves with ash. humipei.

kinship term, vocative, synonym of pushi. pushikawe.

noises of insects and birds associated with the presence of a conuco. hikari theka heã.

noises associated with the presence of the hekura. hekura pe heã.

song of a gallineta (horãma) that indicates the proximity of váquiros. ware pe heã.

the noises that announced the conuco of Aparecido were heard immediately. pore re hikaripi theka heã kuo shoaoma (mit.

noise, signal (real or imaginary) associated with a place or creature; signal that announces the imminent appearance of the being to which it is associated. fheã.

if they kill a big fat tapir near the lagoon, you all will go to the conuco to look for plantains to go with it. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe a wãri wawewawe praope ha kuratha wamaki ha toararini wama a tehiape.

lagoon, pond, marsh, etc.. toararini.

I perceive the strong smell of the magical plants (heri), it is you who will be attacked. heri re ya ki ni pata hore wahahuai ha, pei kahe ke wa nape shurukou ke a kurakiri.

to perceive a smell, to detect a smell. wahahuai.

when the dog was silent, they looked for it because it did not bark again. hiima ke a matha waitou tehe a taemahe, a wã hirio koomi ha.

to be heard, to be perceived (distant noise). hiriãmou.

since you tell me that (= since you invite me), I will not hesitate to travel a great distance to visit you. ei naha yamare nowã thai tehe ya the prahawe kapea totihirarei.

1. To find something by searching with the foot 2. To tread the ground (to go visiting). kapeai.

to bruise an object (once). si taokoamai.

kura constitute a major class of supernatural beings, often in contrast with human beings (and ã n omãmi or yãnowãmi) or with the yai the, another class of supernatural beings, almost always maleficent. kura constituyen una clase mayor de seres sobrenaturales, a menudo en contraposición con los seres humanos (y ã n omãmi o yãnowãmi) o con los yai the, otra clase de seres sobrenaturales, casi siempre maléﬁcos.

supernatural beings. kura.

it is a package. fhãrohãro ke ã hãro.

package. fhãrohãro.

short. hokata.

to make scarce (multiple objects), to deplete (multiple objects). resheshãmãi.

to fold paper. mamisiki yoreke.

to fold. yoreke.

¿cuántos hay. weti naha the kua.

how many. ¿cuántos.

the child, who was clever, passed (from the guatura where he was) to a tree and stayed perched there. ihiru a puhi re moyawei, hii ha a ha piyeikuni, a tikeo heoma.

to pass or move from one place to another. piyeikuni.

él andaba sobre la punta de los pies. the hitesheapraroma.

to stand/walk on tiptoe. hiteshea.

the daughter of Venado showed her the manaka palms. hayariwe ke theepini manaka siki a himikema.

showed. imikema.

to flatten multiple objects. resisamai.

hacerlos vomitar (to make them vomit). siparani ya pe tuyei mamer.

to make vomit. mamer.

I approach as close as possible to where it sings, but I don't see it (the gallineta bird). hãshimo ya wã tisuamai ma kui the mamo pe ã huaai ma kui pe the taproimi tharei.

to approach something; to get close to something. tisuamai.

to have stopped at the entrance of a dwelling. eweheprawe.

to urinate. fuke.

to strike each other with the paw during a fight (a bird). kakekayou.

I accompany the others downriver to the conuco. hikari hami ya ta hu nareokiri sho.

to accompany, to go with others. nareokiri.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

fragmented, broken into small pieces. nakashirariyo.

the shaman's spirits associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the enemy shamans, to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

shaman. hãhoriwe.

a blackish liquid that dripped quickly from the insect (peti naki) nest. peti naki shiu poyopoyomoma (mit.

a blackish liquid. poyopoyomoma.

that Shamathari became a great shaman (= he has many hekura in his chest). ihi a shamathari re kuini pe pariki thãrimipariyo (cha.

to become a powerful shaman. thãrimipariyo.

to start rubbing/scraping something with the fingertips to remove adhered material (like wet sand, dirt, mud, etc.). horokoprai.

to have become curved, to have taken the shape of an arc. payokorayou.

to clear. noka wãwe.

to approach for a moment, to approach briefly. ikutou.

to tell someone to keep something (or someone) closed or in a certain position or situation. fraamapou.

to turn something round halfway, to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemiãi.

to shake (a wet animal, a dog). yomisiprai.

as he heard the rain approaching, Horonãmi sought to dry himself. maa a hoã pata huimai ha horonãmi a wehemoma.

to dry, to evaporate. wehe.

you just felt fear. wa re kiriraruhe.

you just felt fear. kiriraruhe.

to be situated beyond a certain place, to be farther than. torehea.

to be fat, big (living being). hutehou.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami passed by one after the other (carried by the current). motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma.

to be partially emptied or filled. hayaroo.

I will leave (to go somewhere else). e dejaré (para ir a otra parte).

I will leave. dejaré.

the earth is smooth. mashitha a si kopehewe.

to smooth; to homogenize a liquid or cambur compote by reducing all solid parts. kopehekei.

to make love loudly (said by a man). horomo.

to behave aggressively. waitherimorayou.

pair of cane tubes worn in earlobes. purima hiki.

palm tree with spiny trunk. moshohara henaki.

palm tree with spiny trunk; Yanomami remove the spines with nicotine and by squeezing. moshohara.

mother, it is because the váquiros kept me in the center (of the herd) that my body emanates a pleasant smell. ware ke kini ware ha mi ãmomapoheni ya ni kreteri hai ke a tharei.

kept me in the center (of the herd). ãmomapoheni.

to install one. pehithemou.

to rub something with the fingertips to remove an adhering material (like wet sand, dirt, mud, etc.). horokorarei.

the manaka palms surrounded the base of a small hill. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha, manaka yahatoto hami the pehi kãi ha tiwaroikuni.

Tapir circled the top of the mountain, carrying a girl on his back. shamariwe pei keki heaka hami a pata tiwarou ha kuparuni, yipi the suwe ha yehireni (mit.

to walk in a circle in front of the domestic hearths; to circumvent, to walk along the middle part of a slope to circumvent the top of an elevation, to go around in a circle. tiwaroo.

to be happy. yoririmi.

to avoid an arrow or projectile by arching to the side. tutakaprou.

are you going to decide to probe (the den). wamaki re tuo waikiwe, wamaki hipai re waikipohori.

to probe, to sound out. tre-.

to shout when in a dangerous situation, to call for help. sirãrãmou.

speech from upriver. sirã.

to have the forehead painted with a curved line that goes from one ear to the other. tiwarowe.

to tell someone to begin softening an object or to soften it locally. fepehea.

to stop and move alternately (an animal). hothorayou.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

to bite suddenly (a fish biting bait). yomi.

from the moment she returned to being alone, her mother cried for whole days. yãmi pe nii e kuo tehe e miã he weyahaoma.

for whole days. he weyahaoma.

to receive something that has been opened by tearing its wrapping with the fingers. hureshepei.

a family of plants including the custard apple and soursop. nonaceae.

they (both) answered twice. the kipi ã hua re porakarayouwei.

1. To be two who depart. 2. To perform the same action twice (only with an intransitive verb or in the middle voice).. porakarayou.

tomorrow I will go downriver to search for something to eat in the forest. henaha ya ni thaohorayou.

to go downriver to search for food in the forest. thaohorayou.

to climb up, to mount, to sit or squat on, to get into a canoe. tikeai.

perfect tense of tikeai and tikeo. tikekei.

to climb up, to mount, to sit or squat on, to get into a canoe. tike.

it goes down (the level of a water stream). u terereai.

to go down (the level of a water stream). tetere.

in the blink of an eye the váquiros went quickly downstream. yetu, kihami ware ke ki kuaai ha ropaikukirini.

they hurried to paint their bodies. yetu the pe yãrimoã re roparariyonowei.

to walk/do quickly. rope.

the girl who had her first period, and who was isolated behind the menstrual hut leaves, came out without anyone noticing. yipi re henaki hishomi ha ai re a suwe re yipimouwei, a haa hãthorema.

menstrual hut. hishomi.

Yãmonãmãriwe was beautiful, was large and of dark complexion. u ushishiãushuhuwe yarehewe totihitawe no kirii.

dark, muddy (water). yãm.

as those who were walking at the front changed direction again, we slid towards them crouched. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction. akeheaprou.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to order, to request a favor (for oneself). nosiyemoru.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not withstand such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to fight. etiayou.

I put the game meat in water (to cook it). yaro ya kããi.

to wash one's face. mi yãrimou.

to bathe, to soak, to macerate. yãrimo.

not to fear approaching a person to say what one thinks of them, or to challenge them. titeteokei.

mahi. pusipusi.

Please, here we have to start being cautious. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to start taking precautions, to become attentive (when one was previously unconcerned). yawetou.

the clothes got wet from the rain. iro siki patherayoma.

to be wet from the rain. pathei.

it (the water) became muddy. u koshirayou.

to become muddy (water). koshirayou.

type of bamboo point. raerae.

Upstream is the river. Sekisekima bla de río arriba.

upstream. sekisekima.

they wove braided mapires. moroni tima a tuyei telado.

woven, braided. telado.

carried the big dog under the arm. hiima ke a pata yerereherima.

carried under the arm. yerereherima.

a type of parrot, Ara severa (Psittacidae). maracaná.

hammocks hung in the middle in different places. iyoprawe.

I dyed the cotton red. Hãki wake here.

to dye red, to make something red. hãki.

vine, liana (unidentified plant or animal); Dioclea guianensis (tree). kuhãwe.

tener dolor de espalda (lit. peishoki iwapi.

back. iwapi.

do not group together (do not gather with each other). pe tishoshatihe.

do not group together. tishoshatihe.

those who made the cotton balls carried them on their backs, accompanying (the visitors). shinari uko re thaiwehei the pe ha yehiarariheni pe nokaope.

to carry (something) on one. thaiwehei.

(related form of yakeke). he yakeke.

Lanceolate bamboo point. yuri ya pe ha sherarini, mrakatahu a ha Punta lanceolada de bambú. Used for fishing and hunting large animals. Sirve para la guepruka pe praoma.

lanceolate bamboo point. guepruka.

little one, do not bend your legs (keep them spread and straight, as a novice should during an initiation). shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai (cha.

to sit or squat with legs spread and bent, to be in that position. preprekeo.

the wood is dry. koã ãsho washitiwe.

on dry land, out of the water; by land (not in a canoe). fwashiti ha(mi).

to become dry, to stop being flooded (land). wãtetãi.

tener la regla. fna iyemou.

vulva. iyemou.

to break several pieces in that way (durative, plural object). wahathomai.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not withstand such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

make war, shoot arrows at each other. thayou.

to make move, to set to work, to produce waves or undulations. kiããmai.

I dared to ask him, although I'm not sure of his response. ya wã wapeprao poope, ya kuma ma re kui.

to dare to ask someone for something, to risk asking someone for something. wapeprao.

do not claim/demand anything if you do not want to give anything. no mai ha nako tikotihe.

to claim, to demand, to request. tikotihe.

Eat banana. Wake maki.

eat. maki.

(habla de río arriba. osheanariwe a iriamou mrai a re tapareiwehei.

los okã se apoderarán de la huella de tu paso. okrã peni wa mãyo re yurareiwehei.

la chiquilla que ellos raptaron cuando nos atacaron, la llevan ciertamente (sobre la espalda). suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

(mit. pe pruka roa ma kupe fãifãiyomiriwe a re tareiwehei.

It appears in various contexts, but no clear translation is provided.. reiwehei.

he works a lot. a ohotamou no motahawe.

they are always talking. the pe ã wayou no motaai.

very, much, often. motahawe.

when they are completely mature. wãkeguaos.

to paint oneself with several circles on the body. tipikamorayou.

to have bulging eyes. mamoku poyoyoi.

to have bulging eyes (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). poyoyoi.

to be or to place oneself. thãriri.

float immediately, without sinking first. potaai.

he is the one who deceived us (you and him). kamani wahereki miramama.

you + another (you and him). wahereki.

the dog curled up. hiima a motorekema.

to coil up, curl up (as an animal sleeping). motorekema.

to have a desire to inhale a hallucinogen. hoyokaki.

to decorate oneself, to adorn oneself with feathers or bird skins. paushiprai.

large feline (unidentified animal). wãshãema.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and displace objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. hãshãeãi.

to uncover, reveal, discover (that which is hidden or masked); to remove the bark from cotton, part the hair to look for lice; to turn the pages of a book (neol.). apreshe.

to surpass slightly, to be slightly taller than. torehehe.

it was no use for the child to extend the tobacco to him, he acted as if he did not see anything. ihiruni pee nahe ma totopou tehe, a wãri re mohotutionowei.

to be extending an object to give it to someone. totopou.

Õmawe and his brother went in a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they then lived downstream, there where the Orinoco goes under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

to describe a curve while moving, to go in a curve. tihiyei.

to put to soften seje in hot water. si poshomai.

to soften (something) in hot water. poshopei.

the bees gathered immediately on the celestial disc. hetu misi hami puu nari pe urukuprou re shoarayouwei.

to gather in large numbers. urukuprou.

The woman, who was coming out of isolation after having her first period, walked behind. suwe a shuhuhuru huu prihãtou hooma: la mujer, que salía del aislamiento al tener sus primeras reglas, caminaba retrasada.

to walk behind. yipimo.

Nosiriwe cried for lack of tobacco. nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

In all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

Ancestor who spread tobacco. Nosiriwe.

como llovía mucho estaba mojado y aterido. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

aterido. hereri.

the fish parted the fishing line. yurini matiriawe ãsittha uhetirema.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

fish. yurini.

I save money. ya shimomai.

to gather; to accumulate; to pile up; to save (neol.). shimoãi.

to make slightly curved the wall of an object being made. wãhetekei.

the burning breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

(water surface) to undulate, wave. fu pakayumou.

to propagate, spread (wind, water); to undulate, wave (water surface); to break, run over. pakayumou.

Mejorarse un poquito (mismas desinencias). fwahuhu.

to improve a little. fwahuhu.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying and swinging the torso and arms; to tremble (the surface of water). rahurahumo.

Siroromi is tall and his skin is light, he stopped upon arriving. siroromi re a wai prushishiwe yarehewe, a upratareheroma.

he/she/it stopped upon arriving. upratareheroma.

"Quickly, bite me here on the inner thigh. "eyeha yare wãkumi ta wetipraa. ". ".

Bite me here!. wetipraa.

they killed my relative, they made him disappear (lit. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetai, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : they weakened my bamboo tip, they made it disappear). ).

to lose an object while moving, to make disappear, to kill. nohi mohotumai.

to become deformed, to twist. koheheãi.

I take beads (I take a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to pick, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãoãi.

to become darker in a place. hutekei.

I will cover with water the wapu fruits (while they are cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to cover with water a food that is cooking. paopei.

to crack something in several places. nashoprai.

por poco lo mordió una serpiente. oru kekini pe mori tuyei.

snake. kekini.

offering of meat. reahu.

to offer meat. reho.

to wake up, to get up. fhokekou.

that has hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

it has hurt me. amirayou.

here they are (those we were just talking about), they are precisely those. ih i p e.

here they are. ihi p e.

their hands are like ours (yours and mine). ei peheki imiki re kuprai naha the pe imiki rii kuprawe.

their hands. kuprawe.

he arrived at the place where the termites were standing, with their heads covered in white down. osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

they were standing. uprahaope.

he immobilized her by encircling her with his arms around the waist. pei re shithema ha imiki re hãyokokeiwei.

the path is on the side of the mountain. hehu a shithema hami yo kua.

waist, abdomen. herã.

to separate the toes with the hand. mamiki kakatai.

to tear incompletely, to tear at the edge. kakaai.

we had been stopped for a long time when the noise was heard. yamaki uprahatio tehe yetu the ã petariyo kurei.

for a long time. uprahatio.

(upriver speech). pakehe.

they scolded Horonami because (due to his fault) the bees had already risen to the sky. horonami pe no wã thama, puu naki pe heakaa waikirayouwei ha.

to elevate to the sky, to rise above. heakaprou.

we will make love, you said. pemaki ta kuwemo.

to make love (perfective form). kuwemorayou.

to fill up to the brim (termination form). hiekeprou.

"I'll do it later", that's what the gallineta must have thought. "waiha tao", hãshimo ke wa puhi kuprarou no yaionowe (mit.

must have thought. yaionowe.

it is a package. fhãrohãro ke ã hãro.

package. fhãrohãro.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

the pokorami birds have a protruding chest. pokorami pe pariki terehewe.

a type of bird (possibly a partridge or dove). pokorami.

They are going. yauaimi.

bent branch. hii poko tishakoa.

to hang a hammock between two posts (or two trees) too close to each other (the hammock then forms too pronounced an arc). tishoko.

he traced a sinuous line (on his forehead) and immediately put himself on the way to the shapono. the mi hore ha tikekeikuni yetu the wãri ha ikutaikuni, shapono hami.

he put himself on the way to the shapono (a communal house). ikutaikuni.

to pierce (repeatedly) with a pointed object the flesh being boiled, to facilitate the release of blood. erirai.

to soften. reblan-.

to become weak, to lose strength; to become crippled, senile. shikopiãi.

to reach or hit someone. retiweheparei.

the hole in the rock is narrower, it seems. wawa e hena kuprou shoarayoma, yetu ke e.

narrower (hole, cavity). wãkikiprou.

to bend, to twist. evb.

to weave tightly the strands of a basket. hisiniprai.

to weave tightly the strands of a basket. hisiniprai.

Exclamation uttered when someone gets wet or comes into contact with a cold object. hiã!.

to lean against an elongated object frequently. hirikio.

to grow, to lengthen. rapaai.

what do you do to always arrive at sunset. weti ke wa hore thai wa he weyahao tharei.

sunset. he weyahao.

there is nothing left to harvest from the crop. hikari theka no oheprou.

to run out of food, to no longer have available food (from crops); to no longer have honey (from bees). oheprou.

to be hungry. raharu.

they abandon the path to hunt paujíes (with the purpose of obtaining remeras for their arrows) (lit. pe rãmi paokei paruri imisi pe kãi niya ha niyaheni.

remera (feather) of the paují bird used for feathering arrows. fparuri.

when omãyãri stops I go ahead of the upraoni, I go ahead of them. omãyãri ke a ha upraoni ya no mãyo hãii mi ha paoni, ya no mãyo yai thaapraramai (cha.

supernatural beings associated with the rainbow and epidemics; what characterizes them is bitterness. upraoni.

(related word). nihite.

get up early to go kill an enemy (lit. pei waheki rãmi henarayou, waheki ha henarini poshe wãro wahe a niyaprarei.

get up early. henarayou.

to lift something using a long pointed object as a lever. yoreai.

to retrace one. tatoai.

respond to each other, speak one after the other during a ceremonial dialogue. wã huamayou, rec.

respond to each other, speak one after the other during a ceremonial dialogue. wã huamayou.

the otter had curled up in a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã waikirayoherima.

to be curled up in a compact mass; to be far ahead (in the lead). waikirayoherima.

to intentionally set fire to the roof of a dwelling. piyepei.

(when the child is born) I cut the placenta and smear its blood around its mouth, so it will learn to speak soon. pei ya shiki ha hãniprarini, shiki iyeni ya kahiki yaporemai, aka hayuprou totihiope.

to make a circular motion with the arms; to stir a liquid in that way; to draw a circle. yaporeai.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to drop something perpendicularly, to throw down. nihorotamai.

to be slightly tensed. karerehe.

you have an ugly head. wa he wãri towemi.

to be sick, to be in poor physical condition. towemi.

when the apparitions enter the empty house, they stir up the fire by pushing the embers (to warm themselves). yãno proke hami pore pe hai tehe koa wake popohoai.

to make this in a fire situated in the middle of the central plaza. koa wake popohokei.

perfective form of the transitive verb prape. prapari.

fruit of the pahakotorawe akasihi tree. pahakotorawe.

to be disappointed, to feel disappointment (due to a refusal in relation to a desired good). pokomo.

He is determined to go. Niyoprou wake huu.

determined. niyoprou.

a wasp stung me. kopinani yare tikarema.

wasp. kopinani.

carried the big dog under the arm. hiima ke a pata yerereherima.

carried under the arm. yerereherima.

to hide multiple objects behind something, to disguise multiple objects by interposing something. shãhomai.

to be hungry. nohã.

they (two) followed downstream the river of spells. heritha u ha ke kipi mi werema.

to go downstream, to descend a watercourse. werekei.

to have the smell of rotting meat or fish; to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. fni thopokopi.

to have the smell of rotting meat or fish; to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. thopokopi.

to open a path by cutting vegetation with a cutting instrument (applying downward or oblique blows). fyo pahetimai.

they cut off the jaguar's head. ira ke he pahetiprai ha kuparuni (mit.

to cut vegetation by striking downwards or obliquely with a cutting instrument. pahatho.

to purify, to dissolve (under the action of water). pakode.

hacer la selva más luminosa. wa noka ha wawearini.

forest. noka.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to be arranged in a circular manner, to form an arc. watowe.

to have a bad appearance; to be dirty with mud or ashes. totes.

go to the forest and hurry to grow. urihi hami ke wa ha huaani a ta yawea hairi.

to grow, to raise (a child, a pet). yaweprou.

to photograph, to film. puﬁpe toai.

to speak of upriver. puﬁpe.

to have aligned long objects in parallel (perfective aspect of the inchoative). masisirayou.

to receive a cut object. wetipei.

the flowers of the wapu tree. wapu pei ke hunaki.

flower, blossom. monaki.

cricket. kuyuma.

I will exterminate everything that lives in this region. ya the urihi si ahiaiwe.

1. To ask someone to cool something down. 2. To put in the shade; to let (a very hot food) cool down. To kill (lit.: to make cold).. ahiamai.

the pulp of the mahei tree. mahei pe shãhe.

the flesh of the shosho fruits stuck to the skin. shosho moku shãhe warioma.

I'm going to try the flesh of the apia fruits. apia ya ki shãhe ta wapa.

egg yolk. fshãhe nat h e.

flesh, pulp, interior. fshãhe.

I told you that I want to paint myself with onoto (and if you don't give it to me), I won't share with you the necklace of beads. nana ya yããi puhi ha topraoni, ya wã hai waikio.

to take the decision of painting oneself. waikio-.

the thing that produces fear. kiritimi.

to hang cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry. shinari uku rukeke.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. siki koraramo.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. koraramo.

where is my axe. weti hami pooye koshi.

axe. koshi.

my daughter's face is so beautiful. shetemi a puhi riyeheo totihio tharea.

beautiful. tharea.

Woman-woodpecker arrived at her house. Mujer-picumonãmãriwe kama yahipi cho.

Woman-woodpecker. Mujer-picumonãmãriwe.

to blow (a substance) at someone, to aim at a precise spot (excluding the eye and head). horakei.

be a little long (arrow). hutehe.

I had the premonition that a snake was going to bite me. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi.

to have a premonition, to have a feeling that something will happen. totihirarepi.

bend, fold under the action of a weight. yashoai.

to massage oneself (to relieve a hutuka). hutete.

I'm going to get the others, they will cook the pava úquira. ai ya pe koãi, kuremi pe haripehe.

to go get, to bring, to take. koãi.

the ancestor of the fixed eyes (having just been skinned) submerged in the Maharapiwei river. maharapiwei u ha poreri a mamoku royokowe kepariyoma.

to have fixed eyes. royokowe.

he has large hooked nails. pei re the imisiki pe pata nohi reiprawe.

hooked, curved downwards. reiprawe.

they are now constantly alert and will not stop moving in two parallel groups. pe wãri moyawerayou ke a kuhe, pe wãri poaai kuyeheo mai ke the.

to move in two parallel groups. poarayou.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

to be loose, to be wobbly, to not be firmly attached; to be unsteady, not to stand on one. proroa.

to reflect on something, to seek a solution. imikirayou.

a poisoned dart has just rebounded in my throat. mãipariyo kuhe.

a poisoned dart has just rebounded in my throat. mãipariyo.

to pile up, to stack. heruyutukei.

the chicken ran with its wings extended. kakara ihirupi hehewe a rereapraroma.

to extend the wings for a moment. hehetou.

perfective form of the transitive verb prape. prapari.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

to be covered with moss. kapurashipiai.

they brought them dead to the dwelling and incinerated them. shapono hami pe kãi nomawe kopromahe, pe yaprai no kuperaheshi.

they brought them dead. kopromahe.

he smoothed the tail of the capuchin monkey. wisha ke teshina hokokama.

younger brother, that shaman standing there will rub the arrows, and you will become a good hunter again. prake ha a re u p r aopariyowei, pusi ei ke ki re kui, ke ki re hokokoapareiwei.

to caress, smooth (hair); to massage, rub a sick person during a shamanic cure. hokokorarei.

I am hungry. pishã ãsi heã.

to be hungry. pishã.

to deteriorate, to ruin, to damage (terminative form). wãritiprou.

indentation left by the chigger after removing it from the skin. hihu na wãno ka.

there where they had burned the jaguar's head, in the place where there was a mark on the ground, guamo chivo trees grew. ira ke he yapopehe ha, he wãno ka ha, kasha ke nahi hai ha kuparuni (mit.

mark, indentation left by an object after it has been removed. yapopehe.

ithore 1 vb. ithore 1 vb. intr. intr. t ithoreai, inc. t ithoreai, inc. : to curve, to bend; to become curved, bent. : curvar, doblar; ponerse curvo, doblado.

bent. doblado.

to dent (in one place). wãukumakei.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

to make someone stagger or totter. atateamai.

not being able to climb a tree. yoa yohehe.

local discoloration of the skin, that. yohehe.

they slept during the night and felt good, they had already dreamed. titi ha pe ha mioni the pe totihorayoma, pe the pe maharimou waikioma.

to dream, to have a nightmare. maharimou.

in this region in where viven los Waika fearless. nosi wai ahihiwemi re perire hami.

to be fearless, daring. ahihiwemi.

to have been pierced once (prey being cooked). eririrayou.

hurry up to build a scaffold. m athakari pe ta thai hairaruhe she.

hurry up. hairaruhe.

to speak in a low voice, to emit a faint sound. wãhãnono.

to do something that one does not want to do. hamalgo que uno no tiene ganas de hacer, hacerlo.

something. hamalgo.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

to walk behind, to lag behind. korotou.

we put the arrow to dry (at the water's edge). yama a mi shereka hai re kupeiwei.

to dry. kupeiwei.

to heat, to reheat; to rise, to get up. yota.

to walk backwards for a moment, to retreat a little. tirurutou.

overgrown (especially a conuco or path). yasikou.

to lean long objects against each other. hirikimai.

fish, bocón; Brycon spp. (Characidae). topratoprarimi.

hunter who participates in. henimomi.

to cut and shape the flight feathers of a bird to make arrowheads. heki kretitiai.

to cut and shape the flight feathers of a bird to make arrowheads. kretitiai.

the souls arrived in a group at the dwelling, they really arrived like that. porepore ke pe warerou ha kuikiyoni, pe warerou ha yaiparuni.

to enter or exit in a compact mass composed of many elements, to penetrate in a group into a dwelling; to expel in a block a mass composed of many elements. warere.

as they wanted to take possession of his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

I took the gallineta from a hawk (that had killed it). koikoimi iha hãshimo ya he rumakema.

to take possession of (a woman from a killed man, prey from a predator). ruamaheni.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed by falling to the ground (a single object). tikuh.

to urinate frequently. keyekeyemou.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

to become sugary, to sugar. kretetiai.

I will prepare a wad of tobacco for him. pee ya nahe humikei.

the hand, to form a wad by pressing tobacco inside the hand. humishi.

to dawn. ukekeai.

to feel bad. puhi wãrihi.

nosotros avanzamos hacia ti, una planta ãmoamo liviana metida en el hueco de nuestro labio inferior. yamaki husi ka no ãmoãmopi hena karei ta kuikiyo (cha.

lower lip. heãmo.

get all into the canoe. kanawa hami wamaki komi tikekea ha shoaparuni.

to carry out a task together, to do all together. komiprou.

to have painted or dyed something yellow, to have acquired a yellowish color. frãihirayou.

to return on one. hetuprou.

the mosquitoes do not let (one) sleep. ukushi peni the mipramaimi.

to leave (something undone). pramai.

that small thing that is carried tucked between the loincloth and the skin (a knife), I have brought this bow to trade it. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei.

that small thing that is carried tucked between the loincloth and the skin (a knife). hãkiãwei.

to extend, to widen, to amplify (a surface). rerahaakei.

divide the bone. pee nahe repokosi.

divide. repokosi.

everyone knows that in all the places I have been, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco (by planting it in various places). nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma (mit.

they went to look for termite nests (each to a different place). ã r epo koko pe kãi teapotayo kuhe.

to do something repeatedly in different places. -amapotayo.

when she walked at a certain distance from the others, a jaguar appeared. a huu prihãtou hoo tehe, ira ke a petariyoma.

to walk at a certain distance from others. ihãtou.

fear will make me turn my face (ceremonial dialogue). ya kiriri mi huruprarou kukei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to turn one. huruprarou.

to close (a cavity, opening). wãteteprou.

elder. mayor.

the clusters of pijiguaos are numerous and well-stocked, do not touch them (= do not steal them). pe ki shikoprawe.

well-stocked, loaded, full. shikoprawe.

during their escape the hekura left marks of their passage on the vines. hekura pe ruu tehe wãkowãko thotho rekekamahe.

(related form). rekeke.

jo, déjame bajar (de tu espalda). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit.

to let descend (someone one is carrying on one. rápiitho.

to rub (contact). hiririkei.

Is it really true. fpeheti thawe.

to be true, to be right. fpeheti.

it is said that they were accompanied back by the people of Shashanawe. shashanawe theri peni pe ãhã peratayomahe.

receive what has been brought. perapei.

ve de inmediato a buscar mi cola de mono capuchino. wishaye ke teshina ta koãi shoaohoru.

cola de mono capuchino. shoaohoru.

to turn yellow (plant). si teã.

to have vibrated, to have experienced small shakes; to have swayed. tirikirariyoma.

hurry up and climb quickly to cut the vine. yetu re.

to climb quickly. tutatutaikuni.

to become spicy (food). prakipiai.

the rock leaned slowly towards the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki rakiariyoma.

while we were sitting, the sun moved slowly to this place in the sky. heyeha mothoka wai kuariyo iha re yamaki roo heai shoao t e h e.

I approached the enemy warriors (in ambush) slowly and without realizing it. wayu pe rii ha ya aheteariyo.

to move or slide slowly. wereariyo.

the rocky face of Mount Mashohara shines beautifully. mashoharapiwei ki pariki pata re shutukahe noshi re harirape e.

rocky face of Mount Mashohara. Mashohara.

I have protected the tobacco by putting sticks all around it. pee ya nahe hikorokema.

to protect an object (generally a plant) by surrounding it with sticks stuck in the ground. hikoroãi.

to make slightly curved the wall of an object being made. wãhetekei.

the tortoise passed quickly (from the ground where it was) to the footbridge (to cross the stream). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass or move quickly from one support to another. piyetakei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kuniã.

I will take the axe without fail. hãyokoma ya rukepouwei ke the.

I will take it without fail. rukepouwei.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to pile up, to gather, to join together. poshoshai.

tree. Byrsonima.

I was bitten by many mosquitoes. ukushi peni yare mi watherema.

as dawn did not come, they exhausted the firewood to warm themselves. the pe he haruprarou ha maoni koã ãsho pe mi watherema.

consumed entirely, exhausted. watherema.

to dry; to get dry. washitiai.

to become beautiful (plants in a garden, particularly plantains and cambur palms). tiririprou.

to cause suffering. niniãmãi.

to march slowly (perfective). kaweherei.

to mix with. koyoko.

to paint, trace a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch once transversely. tipruturei.

to take, obtain two objects. porakarei.

to have been damaged, crushed (extremity of a long object). thekeherayou.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). sipoprou.

Tigana; Eurypyga helias (Eurypygidae). shererea.

to get stuck or become hard. wãkikei.

a large, dark-colored fish species. oenawe kosi.

a large, dark-colored fish species similar to the . oenawe.

to cool down, to become cold. pothotho.

banana peel. kuratha sipe.

peel. sipe.

we ate large birds. yoopesi yama pe wama.

large hunting bird. yoopesi.

to flash repeatedly (lightning). ihãihãmo.

I broke the end (lit. ka ya yahekikema.

The bat broke the firewood by hitting it. heweni koã ãsho yaheki.

to break, to split, to shatter. yaheki-.

saltarín, poseedor de. kihi a no topepi re niyaope, weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, kihi totahi re sheteterati ke ki iha, ya ki kãi ta huyamou ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to open the mouth, to open the snout in a threatening manner (animal), to open the beak, to separate the jaws. shetetetou.

tadpole. shãfo.

Rabipelado was far away for a while when he thought: "What if I fly. nãroriwe ke a payeketao waikio tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

to be far away, to have been away for a while. payeketao.

to become breathless, to become exhausted. wãshimiprou.

I do not understand what you are saying. ya kua waikia, a wã hoyãowe kutihe.

to understand (what is said, a foreign language). hoyãowe.

the day arrives again (lit. yamaki he wakakai koã.

to be in a certain place at dawn. wakakai.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with yellowish vertical lines. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with yellowish vertical lines. shãshãripiwei.

to make love noisily (said by a man). kohekohemo.

to have the chest painted with an ocher or red background on which sinuous lines have been traced with the nails. foni pariki si tikekewe.

to draw lines around the mouth. fkahiki tikeke.

to draw lines on the chest. fpariki tikeke.

to trace sinuous lines with the nails. tikeke.

I will poke your eye. pe mamo hipipei.

to touch with the end of an elongated object (perfective aspect). hipirei.

(he/she) worked in the conucos. hikarimomarei.

perfective form. momari.

yo saco con una totuma la compota de plátano que está en la olla. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

compota de plátano. hishimani.

to divide, to separate. shekerai.

Hokotoyoma had her hair cut regularly around her head (like a Yanomami woman). hokotoyoma ke the he wai yoothowe totihio yaioma.

to have hair cut regularly around the head (in the traditional Yanomami style). yoothowe.

to flow into. nohãmiãi.

the bats hang upside down. hewe pe mi wereo.

to have the head hanging in the void when lying in a hammock. fhe mi wereo.

to hang upside down. wereo.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashiai.

to fish with a fishing line (jokingly). matiriawe kãpou.

to fish with a fishing line (jokingly). kãpou.

they threw it, dead, into a hole between the rocks. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe kemakemahe (mit.

they threw it, dead, into a hole between the rocks. kemakemahe.

we will return in the morning tomorrow. henaha pemaki koo henaope.

tomorrow morning I will go to harvest corn (by breaking off the ears by hand). yono ya moku keai henaope.

in the morning, at dawn. henaope.

on the slope of that mountain, there where they hang from the trees, I will cut those lianas. fei pariki re uprayaﬁ, fei thoo thoku re tuyahi, ya thoku ta pafetipra.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will say that for sure (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

located in front of, and at a certain distance (variable), from the place of the utterance. -yahu.

to receive something that has been opened by tearing its wrapping with the fingers. hureshepei.

the water is going to boil. mãu a no yorurayopi.

the water is going to boil. yorurayopi.

there are many footprints only in one place, where they broke bushes with their hands to mark their passage. hii ke hi pe re keapotayowehei pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

to compress with. kãshiki.

to have stood on tiptoe. hitesherayou.

to have divided/split/forked (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb . pakararayou.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for the house of them (= look for the house of the hekura). kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe (cha.

the house of them (= the house of the hekura). totihiapotuhe.

the hekura went to kill the dog (or: the shamans traveled in immaterial form to go kill the dog). hekura peni hiima ke a nohi washuai ha kuparuheni.

to take a woman without authorization, to seize another man. washu.

to become sugary, to sweeten. kreteti.

headdress of the hekura that resembles a whirlpool of water. watoshe kremori.

weak smoke produced when starting a fire. watawatamou.

Jaguar dormía con la cabeza volcada. ncima ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma.

cabeza. mi pata.

I was frightened and startled. the auprariyoma.

to enlarge, to extend, to widen. praukuprariyo.

there is a turtle (on the ground). totori pe praa kure.

a turtle. totori pe.

the grease causes nausea. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to feel like vomiting. fp ariki shi harihiwe.

to have nausea, to feel like vomiting. harihou.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

animal. animal.

they also transformed into spider monkeys. pasho pe kãi kuprariyoma.

to transform, to change into. koprariyoma.

he carried the arrows, arms bent at head height. shereka ki yeretai yairayoherima.

he carried the arrows, arms bent at head height. yairayoherima.

to use a magic plant (Caladium bicolor) to retain someone (a husband or close relative who regularly visits another community to meet a lover, or a visitor one likes). shoaprai.

mother-in-law, let's stay here. yape, eyeha peheki ta kuo.

your mother-in-law. yaahe.

the son-in-law departed first and his father-in-law followed him. pe hekamapi e re pariprariyonowei, pe shii e re nohãã shoakenowei.

to depart first. pariprou.

to hit each other mutually with the flat part of a machete, to face each other ritually in this way; to fight with sticks. yoayorayou.

they kill a game animal and will stop having a desire to eat meat. wamaki yaropi wãri ha sheni wamaki naiki mraape.

to have a desire to eat meat, to be a cannibal. sheni.

to address someone using that term, to be with a female person in a husband-wife relationship. wãhãmamou.

the two small partridges picked up a hardened and deformed caterpillar (after being cooked). pokorari ke kilpi waini kasha ke a ripi prithothowe re hokepirewei.

to be totally hardened, twisted or deformed. ithothowe.

hi. mahekotoma.

ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati.

to perfume, to give a pleasant smell to something. kreteriãmai.

put your head here. eyeha he ta tototariyo.

to present, offer a part of the body; to expose oneself to blows from an adversary, offer oneself to a sexual partner, present the body to a shaman for healing. toto.

she gathered the tobacco without hurrying. pee re nahe re hoketaonowei.

to do something without hurry; to do something for a long time. hoketaonowei.

as the stone is heavy, the liana breaks. maa the ma hute ha thotho krininimou.

I will carry a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

heavy. fhute.

the fire has only caught in certain places. wake nohi ayakelaje.

to burn partially. petación.

to distribute it entirely in many pieces, to distribute it completely. ayakosiamai.

to have a period. naremou.

as Bachaco cut down the trees, the corn started to grow by itself. koyeriwe kihami hii re hiki tuyei re kuaanowei, yono mo hai yauai re kuaaowei.

to occur successively (two events), to happen as a consequence of a previous action. kuaaowei.

don't tell me what others say and do. kamiye iha pe ã pakihatihe.

to be always talking about people, to tell what others say and do. pakihi.

to weave the rods of a basket to make its edge. llar.

when the celestial disk broke, the ancestors ran to take refuge in the cacao trees. tu misi keprou tehe pohoroa ana hiki upraope ha poreri ke pe re pririkeiwei.

celestial disk. misi.

the piapocos stop when passing over the peak of Mount Kanae. kanae keki ora hami mayepiri pe pe ropraai hayuyou no thareshi.

a mountain peak. Kanae.

to be situated beyond a certain limit or place. torewe.

in such a way that its end is completely flat and smooth, like the large beetles of the simitori species do when they eat the branches of a tree. de manera tal que su extremidad quede totalmente plana y lisa, como lo hacen los grandes coleópteros de la especie simitori cuando carcomen las ramas de un árbol.

to make something flat and smooth at the end, like beetles do when eating branches. simitikei.

tener dolor de espalda (lit. peishoki iwapi.

back. iwapi.

the man went in company of the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). thapore tao, wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

to mix, to intermingle different objects. thapore.

to have been entirely cut into pieces. hãsinã.

we have taken an abandoned path that passes by the river. hei ke yo tusi re ithopokiri ha pemaki kuparekirio.

abandoned path overgrown with vegetation. ithopokiri.

when they discover a giant cachicamo, they will asphyxiate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

they ate it. wapehe.

you gave (to each one) two objects from the White people, they are young men. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru momo oshe pe ma kui riha.

to obtain, get, or receive two objects at a time. yãhutaai.

women, I beg you to participate all (in this activity). suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in activities (in the forest). haikiokei.

to have scratched or clawed someone repeatedly. tikokorarei.

to snort (once). rekukuãi.

to roll (a round object). toreremarei.

next to, parallel to. fpoa hami.

next to, parallel to. fpoa.

fish with fleshy lips. Prochilodus.

euphemism to announce the death of a certain woman (lit. pukuye ãsi mashi rukea.

strap used to carry babies. wãremashi.

—Cuñado, ¿de verdad eres tú. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe.

you. —shoriwe.

my mother-in-law claims that the wapu fruits are (still) hard. yayeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai.

to solidify (something liquid). hihumai.

to stick a stick into the ground. dán- pasu.

to stick a long object vertically into the ground. dán-.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

the Shamathari wove an open-weave basket, pressing the fibers together, and attached it to the child's ribs. shamatharini yorehi siki sheniniprai a ha tuyerini, ihiru repoku ha siki rekema.

woven basket. shamatharini.

to be naturally unstable or wobbly. kapuruwe.

extremo de la flecha que porta las plumas. fshereka pei he.

acariciar, frotar las flechas pertenecientes a un hombre que ha perdido su habilidad para cazar, con el fin de que la recupere. fshereka hokokai.

ellos sueltan sus flechas, flechas que van a buscar a pesar de todo. shereka pe huheamakei, pe shereka koã he yatiarareihe.

arrow. fshereka.

the arrow broke when it hit. ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei.

to cut transversely; to draw intersecting lines. yaheti.

it is foggy, it is cloudy. fthe mimou ihirashipi.

to become cloudy, to become foggy. ihirashipiai.

it just passed behind Mount Teriope. teriope ke ki hami a ãyorii kuhe (mit.

to go behind, to pass behind. ãyorii.

pei. hurokopi.

the body was heard falling. the tereimoma.

noise made by a living being when falling to the ground unconscious or dead. terei.

his younger brother, who has the habit of going there to visit, was the one who spoke to them. pe oshe, mihami a re huuwei, pe the pe ã keama ha tharei.

to say something important, inform of a serious event; to make a request (for a good, a favor). keaprai.

tree, vine; Parkia pendula (Leg. moshiriwe kathohi.

tree, vine; Parkia pendula (Leg., Mimosaceae). moshiriwe.

it was not long before the murmur of the remiges (= the beating of wings) of the hummingbirds was heard. yeture teshorimi heki hoã petariyoma (mit.

primary remiges (feathers). heki.

to become stiff, to stiffen (under the effect of an effort). hiraraai.

a mosquito has bitten me. ukushini yare hiirema.

to harden locally. hihukei.

to cure someone. haromarei.

the great rock is completely smooth. maa ke ma pata si frakahawe totihiw e.

to be completely smooth, to be smooth and moist. frakahawe.

he always went alone to the forest to eat hidden. uruﬁ hami yãmi a shiro re iyai hãthoowei.

alone, hidden. hãthoowei.

that can be cut or torn lengthwise. sheriramou.

listen well. yimika ta hoyãpari.

listen attentively. hoyãparei.

give fish to my younger brother, whom we ask to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

when they sit next to each other they have to make you sit in the center. the pe roo yehihimou tehe, mi ãmo ha ke wa kãi romapouhe.

to tell someone to keep something (or someone) in a certain position or situation; to put and keep something or someone in a certain position. mapo.

to cook over a flame (perfective). frãrãrãkei.

person who likes sweet things (especially banana porridge). kretemosiwe.

The bulbs are dried on top of the kemaculina (plant used in sorcery). masha sherini, makayo ke ki ka ha a nomawe kemaculina (heri ).

plant used in sorcery. kemaculina.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). pashiko.

he leaned the yagua palm stem along the tree. hii ke hi ha yei ke ãmo hiririmakema.

to lean or rest something along. hiririmakei.

to burn a magical substance near an enemy. yayorayou.

knife fish. waho.

we are shooting arrows at him. pema a niyapraai.

we (I and them) are at war against them. yama pe niyapraai.

I will shoot an arrowhead-less arrow at him. makasi prokeni ya pehi ta niyapraa sho.

to shoot arrows, to be at war. niyapraa.

the children eat the pulp of the cucuritos scraping it with their teeth. ihiru peni kareshi pe wãhehãihe.

to scrape with the teeth the pulp of a fruit (to eat it). wãhehãi.

to have one's first menstruation and also it can be The word 'yipimou' in Yanomami means 'first menstruation'. yipimou.

after she had her first period, her husband deflowered her. a ha yipimoruni pe heãropini ka thaa shoarema.

to have one. yipimou.

to be bruised in one place. si taokoa.

bloodstained, bloody. iye.

bloody, bloodstained. iye.

to go from one side to the other. hatahatamou.

the Mount Maiyo rose up again, in a very visible way. ki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini (mit.

to rise up, to become visible. shatiai.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

wrinkled, creased. rukuruprou.

tomorrow, while you play, you will cover him with your excrement. fenaha ke wa ha iriamoni wa wãri shiipimari (mit.

they had fun, they participated in the presentation dance. the ki iriamoma, the pe praiama.

to have fun, to play, to entertain oneself, to act like a clown; to play by splashing, to play in the water; to perform the presentation dance during a party. iriamoni.

to be partially rolled up in a spiral; to be folded (the edge of an object). yapurea.

they were the first to climb, and many Yanomami climbed after them. pe tua ha pariikutuni, pruka yãnomãmi the pe tuo re hepariyonowei.

to go after, to follow. pariikutuni.

he sharpened the tip of his club a lot. himo ora ke a namo thai preyukua.

to sharpen, to make the tip of an object very sharp. preyukuakei.

plural of misipe. hopehope pe misipe.

thorny palm (unidentified plant) that grows on the banks of rivers. misipe.

the wapu fruits are still bitter (= still not edible, still have not lost their poison). wapu ke ki koãmi shoawe.

bitter, sour, acrid. koãmirimi.

not to worry, not to think about. mohotua.

to be happy. namonamorimi.

he quickly picked up the head and threw it into the river. the he wãri ha hoketareni, pei u ha he sheyeparema.

to throw into water. sheyeparei.

when one has just been initiated into the men's cult. wa the mitai hayua re perayoheriiwei.

when one has just been initiated. perayoheriiwei.

object agitated by the current, whose end emerges at regular intervals out of the water. shoroshoromou.

to remain in that way for a long time. wariritao.

he just passed behind Mount Teriope. teriope ke ki hami a ãyorii kuhe (mit.

to have passed behind, to have gone behind. ãyorikei.

to make a woman sterile using the manaka plant. manakapimar.

to cross in X, to arrange. pakira.

have you finished painting your body. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

but where have they gone. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

have you found them. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

denotes perplexity or doubt. kuhaw.

He arrived after his departure, he has a light complexion. a wãri haa hepei ma re kuroi, a prushishiwe ke a thai.

to have a light complexion, to be light-colored. prushishi.

The Yanomami arrived at the house carrying the woman on his back. yãnomãmi ke the suwe ha yehireherini a kãi kopema.

He arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to arrive, to reach, to come to (a house, camp, or temporary shelter in the forest). kopei.

to make love (a woman) (lit. fnaka pata yãshãmapou.

certainly it is here where she has made love. eyeha the kahiki pata yãshãmapou ayaonowei ke the.

to have open, to keep open. yãshãmapou.

we call each other to gather again. yamaki pokomayoma yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to gather, to assemble, to reunite. kokãmoni.

to start walking. katiai.

to erase footprints so that they cannot be used for sorcery. fmãyo he rao.

very recent footprint, still wet footprint. fmãyo here.

they were following the footprints. pe mãyo nosi teaprarai kuaamahe.

footprint, trail, track. fmãyo.

Horonãmi was lying unconscious. horonãmi re a kohipi praoma (mit.

to have lost consciousness, to faint, to be out of breath after a shock. kohipi.

the child was extending the tobacco to him in vain. ihiruni pee nahe ma totopou tehe.

give me a machete. ipa namo ta totopa.

offer the other arrows. fei ai ki re kui e ki ta totoku.

to offer, to present (to give), to extend an object to someone. totooma.

the mountain Shãshãpiwei whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

a mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei.

we were stung (several times) by wasps of an unknown (or: unnamed) species. yaithakarawe ke a patani yamareki tikararei.

1. Unknown, that which has no name. 2. Euphemism for a dangerous magical plant.. yaithakarawe.

I possess the hekura within my chest. pãrimi ya pe wai huwepou totihitao thare ke.

to possess hekura within one. totihitao.

they cut down trees to collect honey. the nahi thaa ha repa.

to cut down trees. repa.

we abducted a woman from their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to abduct a woman by force. shairei.

to let a child suckle; to keep an object stuck or fixed to another. shatimapou.

both are tall and appear (in the sight of others). ke kipi yareheo ha yaioni, the kipi wawetou ha yaironi.

to be tall in stature (a human being). yarehewe.

the house of the enemies was empty and we did not kill anyone. w a r e re ke ki yanopi prokotaai ha totiikuni.

empty. prokotaai.

Tuqueque arrived when they were crying for the dead. the pe puhi kãi upraai tehe refariwe e kopema.

to cry for the dead. puhi kãi upraai.

to pass the time. durkukei.

Hoo had eaten his brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

to give whole, to consume entirely. wathekei.

quitaba con las patas la tierra del hueco que cavaba. kekumama.

quitaba con las patas la tierra del hueco que cavaba. kekumama.

to sneeze. esikamomai.

come here to cook the meat. yaro a ta tumayo.

come here to eat meat. yaro a ta wayo.

go and meet your husband (where he is). heãroye ke iha a ta aruheriyo.

in the place in question; when the place is not mentioned, it refers to the place of the utterance, or if not, a previously mentioned place, or the place where the person in question is located. tumayo.

furuncle. shããpi.

furuncle. shããpi.

in this point the water is not deep (speaking of the south of the Orinoco river). iha the pe henasio totihio tharei.

to be thin, shallow, or not thick, locally. henasia.

short. horotowe.

he cleared the way by pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand; to reject someone with the hand; to clear the way by pushing aside something obstructing the path. hãipraai.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after the other all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

Indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects at different times; can also connote a frequentative. It is the equivalent of opro for intransitive verbs.. pra.

they gathered (and after someone said): "let's go, young people, have fun". the pe yototai ha kuparuni.

to gather, to assemble. totoprou.

he closes (durative, plural object). he kahumai.

to close (durative, plural object). kahumai.

to disorder. yãkãi.

it is slightly shiny/greasy. the wãisipi mimou tapihiwe.

slightly greasy/oily. tapihiwe.

the young people never stay still. huya the pe yãnikio ma re mai.

to be calm; to stop going from one place to another, to stop agitating uselessly. yãnikio.

to carry a child astride on the hip. paehepou.

to start doing it locally. hirikiprai.

to smooth, to polish (multiple objects). tãihãmai.

el hombre llegó a un lugar donde vivían espíritus. emãmi a warokema.

llegó a un lugar. emãmi.

maleficent supernatural beings of the yai the class associated with roots, they can take possession of the pei mi ãmo of the foot. nasikiri.

kinkajou tail. hãsho si.

kinkajou (Potos flavus). hãsho.

sun. perãwe.

the tree top is swaying (the tree is going to fall). pe he hi wekei ke a kure.

to lean, to tilt. wekei.

to cool down, to become cold. pothotho.

to crush something by hitting it with the palm of the hand, to crush an insect in that way. paikei.

I left an arrow at home and the women broke it in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

they broke it in my absence. kuraheshi.

to become infested by worms. oshapiai.

you always have your head down. wa mohe shiro potao.

the woman, who was warned, lowered the tip of her breasts (and said): "you see very well that I have no child". suwe ke the puhi moyawe totihiwe ei naha suhepi uka mohe potou ha kuroni.

face, visage. mohe.

nighthawk, whip-poor-will (bird species). makoayomi.

he penetrated her and copulated (lit. the mo wãri rukerani, a wãri wãekewãekemoma.

he copulated (lit.: he agitated). wãekewãekemoma.

to be lying on one. tutakikei.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama (mit.

inflated, dilated, swollen (plural objects). shuweprou.

cricket. kuyuruma.

at night they performed the heri ritual: "Women, you must all participate. titi ha pe herima: "suwe pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she. ", the elders exhorted. ", pata e pe kuu ha kuparuni (mit.

to sing together, to perform a ritual chant. herii.

I don. kurararahei.

in the center (of the fabric), where it is dense, the Spider-spirit was crouched. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

to become dense, thick, dense (in the center of something). sutaprou.

to do it for oneself. tikarorei.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to have walked through the water. iroropariyo.

to finish staining or spotting. hayapishiprou.

crouch there where you are, and put curare tips on your arrows. miha a rii ta yereiku, ahe namoku ta hiima.

crouch surreptitiously behind him. pei ke humapi hami wa kuprou ha hãthoreni, wa yereiku.

to crouch, to squat. yereiku.

to be affected by a fungal infection causing itching and covering the body with sores. si ruru.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted with a reddish-yellow tint. yãmonãmãritawe a oni frãihiwe totihitawe.

to have the body painted with a reddish-yellow tint. hahewe.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

to cause something to be in a central location, near the fire, water, above or below. mape.

¿te dejo las sobras. ahe ya shee ta hepei.

los sobrevivientes huyeron lejos. prahai hami the pe wai shee tokurayoherima.

leftovers, remains. sobras.

bend over. hore tehehewe.

whirlpool, eddy. motoheri.

to cure a seriously ill person. kaihimarei.

to deviate someone. yakehou.

Woman-curare crumbled a piece of her skin and let it fall into the throat of Jaguar's son. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema.

I shell corn. yono ya mope hushishai.

to crumble, pulverize with the fingers, crumble in the hand. ushishai.

that's enough, it's over, it's finished. ih i re ke.

that. ihi re ke.

to be afraid. mapehero.

to shout in a certain way: . hoohoomo.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk. waroroaprarou.

women, I beg you to participate all (in this activity). suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in activities (in the forest). hãitho.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

to feed someone a malefic substance (heri) mixed with food; to feed a hekura offering ami u. shapokonayomani.

he put it on the ground. a wai ha prakini.

to possess an object with a handle attached by being wedged into a split stick. haomapou.

breasts. sifuku.

to have carried to land several objects that were in a canoe or in the water. washiriamakei.

(it) falls and also it can be The word 'mi weya' in Yanomami means 'to speak (southern Orinoco dialect)'. mi weyaai.

to fall. mi weya.

to comb someone. yakekou.

lie down next to me. a ta yakaiku.

lie down next to someone in a hammock. yakaiku.

to add salt. mositimai.

to grow, to become tall. yareheprou.

ya reconocí la planta de los y a w a r i. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena no ihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a no ihip ia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo no i hi pia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. irei.

Rabipelado flew away. nãroriwe a yerayoherima (mit.

flew away. yerayoherima.

very tight (a knot, a bond, a union). ãkikiprawe.

drip, trickle, flow. piyo.

perfective plural object of . hoterariyo.

(the water) became muddy. u koshiprou.

to become muddy (of water). koshiprou.

to paint one. raokoprou.

Horimawe has gone to sit on the path of the weyari, the healing trees will come to you. weyari pe no mãyo ha horimawe a roopariyoma horihori hiki niya re huope ye e.

healer that cures the sick. horimariwe.

Rahararithawe's daughter was dancing raising and lowering her arms rhythmically. rahararithawe ke theepi imiki yokoai kuaama.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically. imiki yoko-.

to coil, to roll up spirally, to hem, to fold the edge of something. yapure.

the rocks are covered in moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

to be covered in moss. kapurashipip.

we ate large birds. yoopesi yama pe wama.

large hunting bird. yoopesi.

to become flat, plane, horizontal (the end of an elongated object, especially a stick or piece of wood). tataha.

we (I and them) have filled the baskets with pijiguaos. kamiye yamakini rasha yama pe thariki re thaapotayouwei.

while the members of my community stay to kill the enemy effigy, I walk ahead in company of the others. kamiye yamakini iha no owe a shei hoohe nareo tehe ya paria narerayoherima.

we (emphatic, including the speaker and others). yamakini.

tall stature. yareheithawe.

estoy seguro de que algunos anduvieron contando chismes. ai the pe wanomorayoma, e naha ke ya puhi kãi peritou.

andar contando chismes. wanomorayoma.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallineta. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to have reached the summit, to have climbed to the top. pororokei.

he remained in the tree until dawn and, being prudent, he checked that the tree was not trembling. ha re the tikrea he haruma, a ha moyaweoni the hi tiikou mima.

to tremble, vibrate, oscillate. tiikou.

See we. puhi ehepi.

desist from building that shelter. the yãno wãri ta tirakihe.

desist. tirakihe.

to be very hungry. keekee.

la gente de río arriba usa guayucos tan estrechos que los testículos les sobresalen por ambos lados. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

estar ubicado a ambos lados de. yakaroprawe.

to produce many clusters. ikreheai.

to produce many clusters. ikrehe.

¡Yo me voy a emboscar río abajo. kamiye ke ya praokirio e.

¡en la mañanita estuve bajo el efecto de los alucinógenos. ya prao re henaopoi ke.

to ambush, to lie in ambush, to be under the effect of hallucinogens. yeteke.

to whom shall I give it. weti ke iha ya hipeape.

to whom, to whose house. hipeape.

to mix (plural objects). koniãkei.

his father has given it to him. pe hiini a hipekema.

the father of Tucán came to take Kasima as his wife. mayepirithaweni pe hiini kasimi a tea mi parema (mit.

his father, his older male relative in a direct line. hiini.

I am the only one who wants to work. kamiye ya shiro ohote makokoa.

at this moment he is alone. a kua makokotoo.

to be the only one, to act on one. makokoa.

Sorocuá advanced staggering, and then collapsed. kurekurethawe re e krei re kuaaheriiwei, a shoaparema.

to collapse, to fall down. shoaparema.

to make float, to let float. pokepramai.

press your fingers together. imiki ta wikok o i k u.

to have the fingers pressed together. wikok.

to split longitudinally, to crack lengthwise (an object). ikrãkãprou.

I was quickly dipping it into the honey to eat it. wãisipi ya the wai ha otoototaakini.

to quickly dip food into a liquid to eat it. otoototaakini.

to face each other in two groups in a game that consists of pulling a vine, each team trying to pull the other in the opposite direction. shaimayorayou.

Rabipelado took flight and went away. nãroriwe a yerayoherima (mit.

to go flying, to take flight. yerayou.

sensation of discomfort (of physical or psychological origin). shesensación de malestar (de origen físico o psicológico).

sensation of discomfort (of physical or psychological origin). shesensación.

to diminish, to become very weak (noise, voice). manashiaai.

to form, to come out. thorohoai.

to clean, wipe, erase, dirty entirely. hãhirarei.

to have separated definitively. shekererayou.

red (color). wakewake.

vean que vuelve a hacerse de día. pe the haruu koo ke a re kuimi.

su vigilancia cedió en el momento en que se aproximaba el día (se durmió y) roncó. pe the haru oweai totihioimai tehe, a puhi ha mrataruni, a hohoruãmoma.

él despertó en el momento en que rompía el día. the haruu uheheprou tehe a rãrãyoma.

to be day, daylight. haruo.

none of his arrows really hit the prey, they only grazed it. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to shoot arrows at a target without hitting it. tishikitaa.

something heavy presses against my sides momentarily. miki ya pariki ha the hute yakaroprao.

to envelop, to pass by one side and the other (momentarily). yakaroprao.

variety of ocumo (tuber plant). isharo.

(he/she/it) starts to walk describing a curve (after walking in a straight line). shomi va shokeai.

to walk describing a curve. shokeai.

to hang at a low height. tiroro.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains and also it can be The word 'kuratha' in Yanomami means 'banana'. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

there are banana leaves on the ground. kuratha si hena praa kure.

downriver. kuratha.

he/she is my younger brother/sister. aiye ke a.

they killed their younger brother/sister. pe ai pe sheremahe.

younger sibling of the same sex; my younger brother (male speaker), my younger sister (female speaker). aiye.

to put completely yellow, to dye or paint completely yellow (perfective form of the factitive verb). ashimakei.

to fish by tying a line to a branch. fãsitha karoramai.

to fish. -tha.

the hallucinogenic drug seems strong, his face took on a serious expression. epena a no wayuopi a mimou puhi tikrohowe.

1. To be satiated. 2. To have an odious, sullen or worried look; to put on a serious expression.. tikrohowe.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway. the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

they escaped. yatioherii.

stop there. ata hetaru.

to stop walking, to stop abruptly while others continue. hetou.

high, elevated. tire.

immediately the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the surface of the water. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma.

float (durative, plural object). pokekou.

he pulled down the liana gently several times. pe thotho ikoikomoma.

to pull down, to attract downwards. ikomos.

vayan, partan primero. pei, kuhami, pe ta pariri.

ponerse a la cabeza de un grupo que se desplaza; preceder, partir antes que los demás. pari.

the ancestors became more and more numerous. porepore ke ki re parai totihionowei.

they became more and more numerous. totihionowei.

his eyes are very red, also their faces are. pei ke the mamo wake no kirii, ihi e naha the moheki kuwe.

face, visage. mofeki.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the screaming piha (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

screaming piha (bird species). watawarawe.

not be very long. frapatihiwe.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty of inhabitants (a dwelling, camp). roroko.

his/her brother-in-law. ouwepi.

they never said 'kill him with arrows'. a nowã thai maomahe.

to kill with an arrow. maomahe.

to receive a large quantity. ripei.

round, spherical. coco.

darkness, gloom. ruweruwe.

the simitori (an insect xilófago) has partially gnawed the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

an insect that partially gnaws or bores into wood. simitorini.

to untie. oshokoreprou.

null. yakohe.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. yorikotii.

take the child to (his/her mother), he/she is afraid. ihiru a ta komakutu, a kirii.

to take (the child) to (his/her mother). komakutu.

crouch over there, I will crouch here. miha ke a ta yereiku, kiha kamiye ke ya yereo.

to crouch, to squat, to be crouched or squatted, to perch (for a bird). yereo.

it kept raining. maa ke pe keoproma.

to keep raining. keoproma.

they will follow one another to go around the exterior, in this way they will have fun. sipo ha wamaki ha ãyopraani pe ta iriamo.

to place around, to surround. ãyoyo.

to be quiet, to remain silent. hirotou.

(no translation provided). shirãkomi ãmosi henaki.

Heliconia revoluta and Heliconia hirsuta, bijao (Heliconiaceae). shirãkomi.

to reflect, to question oneself, to wonder what one is going to do, to be undecided. wetinahamou.

to be wrinkled or crumpled in a place. ãpretea.

you will remember this. wa puhi hatukeope.

to remember, to recall. hatukemai.

on top there were raw caterpillars, and underneath were the others, twisted from cooking. heaka hami kasha riye pe re me un ovillo de algodón.

to be at the bottom, to be underneath. kohomoo.

overgrown (especially a conuco or a path). yasikirei.

cachicamo. yoroahirimi.

to lie down on the ground. prapramou.

the fruit of that tree. rerokotorawe akasi.

tree; Inga sp. (Leg., Mimosaceae). rerokotorawe.

to approach the edge of a stream. f kasi iheteai.

to move towards the end of something, to place oneself at the end of something. iheteai.

to have placed long objects next to each other (perfective of wariripou). waririmarei.

it is necessary that you dig the ground as you advance. mashitha wa ha titheriherini.

it is necessary that you dig the ground as you advance. titheriherini.

harpoon arrowhead. ãtãri ãhi teshi.

repetition. indi-.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to scratch, to claw, to rake with nails/claws. hukeke.

I used to dock at a place where the vegetation was sparse. u nokare wawepohori ha ya katioma.

shore, bank, edge. nokare.

to crackle. shãiãmou.

tree. porohoa.

(speech from upriver). feeshe.

cooked (plural objects), perfective. ãmiãkei.

to make oneself accompanied by a hammock. peramou.

to have heated up, to have become hot. yoprarayou.

to have one. mãrokoshimamou.

the. el.

he did not take long to reach the path of the one who appeared, on which he emerged, and then walked across the plain. pore re a no mayo hami yeture e he hapraa ha heikuni, a heyaripekirioma (mit.

the path of the one who appeared. heyaripekirioma.

the canoe is corroded in parts by rot. kanawa a rep i s i.

to become thin, to be corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisii.

to move from one place to another, to make the rounds. aha.

the two small partridges picked up a hardened and deformed caterpillar (after being cooked). pokorari ke kilpi waini kasha ke a ripi prithothowe re hokepirewei.

to be totally hardened, twisted or deformed. ithothowe.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to feel sleepy. maharishii.

to become sparse, to thin out. shororo.

fish, pike characin. hiiporewe.

to finish shedding skin (snake) or bark (tree). ukukuprou.

disperse (while walking). pe ta rãikiroheri.

they had abandoned the path each one at a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni (mit.

disperse (while walking); manifest in various different places. rãikiroheri.

to start piling up. heruyutuprai.

to become speckled or spotted (with black). pãrishãpiprou.

his younger brother spoke as dawn was breaking. the mi wakaraai tehe pe oshe re e ã petariyoma.

to rise (the sun); to dawn. wakaraai.

the rope of the canoe has come undone. kanawa a natha kusheprariyoma.

it has come undone. kusheprariyoma.

they are always crying in the forest (after a mourning period). pe hoyããimi.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

they do not utter death threats (against you). the pe ã hoyããi maa kure.

This word is part of various idiomatic expressions. hoyããi.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent (under the weight of the tapir climbing on it). kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei (mit.

small bow for a child. hithothema.

your hands stink. wa imiki ni feweri.

to stink, to smell bad. heweri.

"don't look at us. "wamare mitihe. ", they say that (when it rains heavily). ", a kuu tikotihe.

don. mitihe.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). sipoprou.

all the trees that I cut to collect the honey of the oi bees, get caught, one after the other. oi ya he pehi kãi pashokai ma kure, pe he pehi hããtarou tikoo thai.

to get caught, to get stuck. hããtarou.

he ate the man accompanying him with casabe. nashi re ﬁki ha yãnomãmi a teﬁai fa kuponi.

to accompany (food). teﬁai.

to begin to paint a motif composed of two crossed lines on someone. yãhiriprai.

small pieces of wood used to start a fire when the ground is wet. wãna.

to start cooking on or over a container placed directly on the embers, to start cooking on a metal plate placed on the embers (usually a cassava flatbread). rãmiprai.

great bat; Wampyrum spectrum. wãZool.

no ceses de visitarme. ware he warou mraotihe.

to visit. mraotihe.

to start hitting someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikiprai.

that is inclined towards the ground. the mi wetea.

to be naturally directed towards the ground, to be twisted (towards the ground). mi wetewe.

to be inclined towards the ground, to be slanted. wetea.

fine. finas.

brother-in-law, I am leaving. shori, ya kuhamii.

to set out, to depart. kuhamii.

spotted antbird (Thamnophilus punctatus). pishewe.

ripuhusirimi. ripuhusirimi.

colic, diarrhea. kriikrii.

Father-in-law, let fall in pieces the honeycomb. shoape pei ke aruku ta kemarari.

let fall in pieces. kemarari.

we shot arrows at them and they cried: "hokiã. the ha niyakini : "hokiã. hokiã. hokiã. ". ", e pe kuma.

alarm cry. hokiã!.

it is because the hekura guarantee the otter its protection. hekura peni proro ke a wãhã hayumapou yaro.

1. To be convinced of someone. yupou.

to braid, to interweave fibers. kapirosi.

the feline roars. ira nosiyeãmou.

to roar; to yell like a feline during combat or when warriors line up in the central plaza. nosiyeãmou.

to emerge vertically, to have an upward vertical movement. nimorãyou.

the earth is smooth. mashitha a si kopehewe.

to become smooth, to smooth out. tãihi.

to speak badly the Yanomami language, to speak making mistakes often. fwã hai ãrehewe.

to get tangled up (when speaking), to mix up topics. fwã hai he tiheriai.

to speak badly the Yanomami language, to speak making mistakes often; to sing badly, to cry in a strange way (bird). ãrehewe.

dead. kreterei.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

he crushed the bee cells. hukukaturou.

I have the urge to vomit. ya no suharayopi.

I have the urge to vomit. suharayopi.

"Father-in-law. shoape. Father-in-law. shoape. " he shouted. e komima.

father-in-law. shoape.

to cry loudly (a child, due to a strong reprimand, or exaggerating for a scolding or a simple refusal). miã huthei.

to cry loudly, to shout. huthe.

as the edge of the club was damaged (from the blows it had struck) he turned it over (to use the other edge). himo a roroku wãritiwe ha, shomi roroku re nomihitarei.

1. Change hand, change shoulder (when carrying something); use the other edge of a tool. 2. Succeed someone to receive a share of a distribution, relieve someone carrying a load. nomihitai.

to become solid (for something that is liquid). hihuprai.

they hid it near the entrance. pei yoka horeope ha a hithea shoakemahe.

to hide, to conceal. hithep.

to fill. hayaro.

to tear into strips (e.g. cloth). makokai.

mai koko: peraman fish, sticky substance made from the resin of the mai kohi tree. mai koko: peramán, pez, sustancia pegajosa fabricada con la resina del árbol mai kohi.

tree. mai.

to pierce, to perforate (once); to pierce a child. hitosoai.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. noshi tãihiãi.

to pile up, to heap up (fruits). pororoamai.

the danta was full of ticks. shama a toripioma.

to have ticks, to be infested with ticks. shihe.

we have surrounded the collective dwelling. shapono yama a he hithorokopema.

1. Construct a dwelling with a circular roof in one piece. 2. Fence, surround a dwelling or a person. ithorokopei.

to shake an object planted in the ground, to uproot it or to verify if it is firmly embedded. hãwekerei.

that is what we intend to do and that is the reason why we leave you here. ei naha re pe niya ha thapramani, pusi pe thapi heipou ma re kui.

to leave someone/something behind, to abandon on the way. thapramani.

to begin to spread the thighs (after having been in another position). yoratou.

to have the eyes turned or blank. mamoku si he nohorayou.

to have the eyes turned or blank. nohorayou.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another tribe. pashikãi.

shoot your arrow quickly, it is going to escape. a ta niyãi ta haio, a no tokurayopi.

it is going to escape. tokurayopi.

to scream in despair, to scream in panic. akamiãmou.

—¡soy yo. —k a m i y e.

yo no me daré prisa en mostrarme. k a m iye ya tapramou haio mai ke the.

I. kamiye.

the herd of peccaries is near here; the hosts have asked that you be the one to recite the opening formula (of the feast). ke ki hiraa kure: la manada de váquimino, los anﬁtriones han pedido que seas tú quien recite la fórmula de apertura (de la ﬁesta).

herd of peccaries (a type of wild pig). váquimino.

to go and inform oneself correctly. shaririamai.

he separated several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to obtain or take a banana shoot. tikarerei.

in the conuco I protected the avocado tree with a row of sticks placed in a circle around it. hikari theka hami ãhãi ya hi he ithorokoverbo rema.

to surround, encircle; to protect a plant by placing sticks around it; to construct a dwelling with a circular roof. hea.

women, I beg you to participate all (in this activity). suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in an activity (in the forest). hãithomai.

to adhere something to someone. raoyou.

snake. Clelia.

we start running again and we quickly put ourselves inside. yamaki rereai kuaai kooheri ha, yetu ke yamaki titetetariyoma.

to put oneself inside. titeterayou.

you can see that the vine is not resistant at this point. pe thotho epehea ke a ma re kui.

to be soft, flexible, or pliable. eshehe.

metaphor for saying that rumors and news spread rapidly. fwãno pe imikou.

to spread rapidly (like rumors or news). fwãno.

Ay, my eyes are burning. ya mamo pe fraai re waikia tikore ye e.

to stir, to mix, to agitate (a liquid). tikore.

the cotton (thread) with which the fletching of the arrows is made. shinari shereka pe he re haomamouwei.

cotton thread used to attach feather fletching to arrows. haomamouwei.

the moriche fruits become slightly yellowish when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to become slightly red or yellowish, to begin to ripen (of fruits). shopou.

sazonar con picante. prakipiprai.

he made a detour and passed under the roof of the house, near the place where the hammocks are hung. pe pariherii tehe shapori a sipoo ha re nahi pariki hami e ãyoherima.

he made a detour and passed under the roof of the house, near the place where the hammocks are hung. ãyoherima.

to flatten the surface of an object that one is making. resisikei.

to smooth, to make smooth and wet. frakahamai.

make the hearths be placed one after the other, as they were before. mihami re nahi he tikeamai ta kooimahe.

to place elongated objects one after the other, to put one after the other (durative, plural object). tikemai.

as it was raining, I stuck palm leaves in the ground to shelter myself. maa a kei ha ya masikoku ithãk e m a.

the path passes under the barrier of palm leaves. masiko e ki re rere hami yoka horea kure.

palm leaves used as protection. masikok.

you were impregnated (lit. wa shipenarayoma.

you were impregnated. shipenarayou.

Mahariri came to hit me. mahariri a wãrini yare re sheparihe.

supernatural being associated with nightmares. mahariri.

they live there. tihetiprou.

term of kinship, vocative; designates any direct blood relative, younger, and male (male or female speakers): younger brother, son, parallel cousin younger than Ego. ãi.

food that is chewed. wãshikãmou.

to be on the other side of an elevation. yaheria: encontrarse del otro lado de una elevación de terreno.

being on the other side. yaheria.

drink it. a ta koari.

drink it. koari.

perfective form of the intransitive verb . sheririrayou.

precisely in this place the shelters did not bode well (for our expedition), one of them broke suddenly. iha hãto nahi hapa horihiãmorayou, nahi keprakei.

an event that is interpreted as a bad omen during a war expedition (a shelter that collapses, an explosion of wood in the fire, a hammock rope that breaks, a dream of a jaguar killed by men, etc.); also applied to the behavior of a sick animal without apparent cause, believed to be sent by enemies as a trick to make someone who touches the animal sick or die. horihiãmou.

what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me. kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by pulling with the hand, exerting lateral pressure). hoyopa.

he undid the knots that held the vines of his hammock in place. thoo thoku he kushesheprarema.

my older brother comes to me and lies down in my hammock made of vines. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

go, prepare the hammocks to leave. pei ye ao.

hammock made of vines. fthoo.

in the water. -pariy.

to shake the head when one has wet hair (to remove water). fhe yomikiprou.

to jerk the bent arm to recover from a blow or shake it when it is sore, or to restore blood circulation when experiencing tingling; to shake the head when the hair is wet (to remove water). yomikiprou.

they are aligned (they are grouped in a row). the hirao wirinawe.

to align (low objects). fhiraa.

there is a lot of fishing line (rolled up in the roll). matiriawe a sute.

thick, dense, compact. sute.

to fill; to make someone eat until satiated. petimai.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another tribe (said of a man mixing with men or women from his own or other communities). ishipashiki.

a type of vine; Tynnanthus polyanthus (Bignoniaceae). hayahayama.

offer it to the ones and the others. pe ta topeapotu.

offer it to the ones and the others. topeapotu.

to become beautiful (plants in a garden, particularly plantain and cambur plants). tirirou.

to damage in several parts the edge of a tool by hitting it against a hard object. namo ka yakekeai.

to damage. tra.

I was sheltering from the rain when Aparecido came towards me. ya weheo tehe poreawe ke pe warokeyoruu kuroi (mit.

to come towards. warokeyoruu.

to take two parts for oneself. fãkoho.

that they change my mental faculties. ya puhi aithaa ta toithipe.

my mental faculties. toithipe.

Paint my face red with annatto dye. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint one. momihio.

to give the urge to urinate. niaasi keyeamai.

(perfective) helped someone urinate. niaasi keyemarei.

to give the urge to urinate, to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, sick person or elderly person to urinate. keyeamai.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to pile up, to gather, to join together. poshoshai.

not be very long. frapatihiwe.

the plants are already big, the petioles are a little thick. pe henaki pataa waikipariyoma, preãkãwe ke henaki hetho.

a little thick/stout. waikipariyoma.

to have a voice that is beginning to change; to become hoarse. wã peherãp r o u.

changing (adolescent); having a hoarse voice (from having shouted too much or after having participated in a ceremonial dialogue). peherãp.

he lay down in his hammock adorned with a transverse line. thoo ke thoku tipruta ha a perikema.

to lie down in a hammock without delay, to lie down for a while. peritou.

to have finished debarking/skinning (an animal). tiprokorarei.

to put the arms behind the back. yehitou.

that I cover my head with that. ya e he ta yohotao totihio she.

to cover one. yohotao.

to immobilize a person by standing on each side and holding their arms. hetutupou.

to move by jumping, as frogs do. yutuyutu.

fluid state and also it can be The word 'hereshi' in Yanomami means 'clear'. estado t hereshi.

fluid. hereshi.

remove the bowstrings from their bows. hãto ke nahi pe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

remove the bowstring. hayurarihe.

to be in a hurry. moremorema.

the souls invited them one after the other, until the last one. yetu the hi hoã kãi haha haikiapotuheni.

they invited them one after the other, until the last one. ohaikiapotuheni.

¿están ustedes pintados y adornados. wamaki paushimoã haikiprariyo ta kuhawe.

to be adorned and painted. paushimorãyou.

to sit or squat for a while at the edge of the water. rotapariyo.

to be about to close the mouth. sutitou.

responder. wã hai puhi yopra.

to respond. yoprao.

to build the part where one will live inside a communal house; to build a shelter in the forest. yãnomou.

to receive or request a half tobacco leaf split along the central vein. pee nahe repokosipei.

to receive or request a half tobacco leaf split along the central vein. repokosipei.

he immediately scraped the muscles of his neck, then those of his arms. pei re orahi the hami the hokekãi shoaoma, pei poko hami the pe kãi hokekãma.

to scrape, to remove the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting superficially, to clean the bottom of a pot by scraping. hokekerei.

dust, powder. mrakamraka.

noise that is made. shãkãushãkãumo.

to make the inside slippery. takraamai.

sugar. kretetirimi.

to throw into the central plaza of the house. sheyepei.

tree. uﬁ.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to stay behind when others leave; to constitute a remainder. heikikei.

to have become curved or sinuous (often referring to an arrow). ethetherayou.

Õmawe advanced crouched so as not to be seen and quickly found himself near (the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei (mit.

two of us advanced crouched to observe the monster rahara. porakapi peni pe opisi terekou tehe, rahara keki mimahe.

to advance crouched (to go unnoticed). terei.

Õmawe advanced crouching so as not to be seen and quickly found himself close (to the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei (mit.

to suddenly bend down (e.g., under a heavy load or to go unnoticed). terekeprakei.

she puts the container with them on the ground and (they are seen) swarming. the pe rãtãrãtãprarou.

swarming. rãtãrãtãprarou.

to crumble, to collapse (perfective form). hashishirei.

fish. coporo.

to be clearly distinguished (noise, voice), to be heard clearly. wã yawereai.

to be heard for a moment (noise). wã yaweretou.

1. to be clearly distinguished (noise, voice), to be heard clearly; 2. to be clear (noise). yawere.

The indigenous people remove these animals with spines or needles. hihaespinas.

to remove parasites with spines or needles. hihaespinas.

to widen, expand, extend (in surface area); to become wide (a hammock). hauhuai.

hang my hammock where your wife is, and do not lie with her after I leave. wa suwepi kuope ha yiiye keki ta yaumaki, ei keki ha wa yakaprao hoo tikoo mai.

to remain lying together in a hammock for a moment. yakaprao.

some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pata prariroma (mit.

to scatter one by one, to shed (fruits, flowers, etc.). prathethai.

to separate from one. yokaai.

to go behind, to pass behind. oritaai.

we advanced cautiously, with our ears on the alert. y amaki yimika opi taatarou kuaaherima.

cautiously. amaki.

mythological ancestor, owner of curare. mamokoriyoma.

that small thing that is carried wedged between the loincloth and the skin (a knife), I have brought this bow to trade it. the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei.

to get stuck or wedged between two objects, to jam. wãki.

tense for an instant the upper end of the bow. ora the hi hami the ta iyopraa.

tense the upper end of the bow. iyopraa.

to receive a piece of game meat. pakekeapei.

small partridge; Tinamus guttatus (Tinamidae). yowehemi.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to crush with the foot, to kick an object to destroy it (a semi-spherical object). katikiai.

shaken (plural objects). yaisirarei.

unfortunately they ritually wrestled in the middle of the central plaza. the pe yãimou mi ãmo re tikooherinowe.

to ritually wrestle during an alliance feast. yãimou.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. ﬁtata.

if he obtained at least one, he would stop complaining, he would act as if nothing happened. mori totihiwe ke ya yaupe, ya nakou kotãope mai, ya mohotuo totihiope.

to act as if nothing happened, to be indifferent. mohotuo.

to make smooth and wet (perfective). frakaharei.

bird (unidentified) belonging to the Columbidae family. hekehekemi.

to reach a state of excessive ripeness. opirãyou.

the white arrows of the birds have the shaft finely grooved. herãmi pe sherekapi au (mit.

the white arrows of the birds. shetitirakiri.

to have grown (a plant). kaurayou.

to let fruits reach an excessively ripe state. poshoropiãmai.

to become dirty or opaque on the surface. ukosirariyo.

He has wavy or curly hair. Uu shi wãrihiwe ama.

to have wavy or curly hair. shi wãrihiwe.

to be capable of spitting magic plants or pathogenic objects. pehithepramou.

Prueheyoma (them) cursed immediately. prueheyoma a hirai shoaoma.

to curse, to scold, to rebuke. hirarayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri.

a mountain name. rihuma.

he was walking in the lead. ya the no ihipirei kurei, the ha pariparuni.

in the lead, at the front. pariparuni.

make the child come to the center of the group. ihiru a ta mi ãmopari.

to place someone in the center of a group or in the middle of the water. ãmopari.

(perfective). hurayou.

Ouch!. hosã!.

they were shelling corn. yono mo pe hushima- yopra- he.

to shell, to remove kernels from cob. hushima-.

to drag an object to the center of the dwelling, to receive from another a woman who has been taken by force. shaipei.

a large animal died, lying on the ground. fthe pata tekeria.

an animal lying dead on the ground. tekeria.

the one who habitually performs the action indicated by the verbal root (masculine form). -rewe.

to be covered in dew. femaãhu.

to be supernatural, generally manifested when inhaling a plant. ohara.

to be supernatural, generally manifested when inhaling a plant, the pore henaki (lit.: leaves of the apparition), or when one has been the victim of the maleficence produced by means of another plant called hayakoari henaki (lit.: the plant of the hayakoari) also known as mashohara henaki. ohara.

they killed one of my parents (lit. yare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to smile, to laugh. wate.

opposite of . shi katehe.

they will eat meat (lit. wamaki yaropi wãri krothakrothamope.

some hekura hunters joined the son of Õmawe (who I possess as hekura, in my chest) and that is why I am still a good hunter. omawe pe ihirupi iha shama niyatimi a ha ithooproni, ya the pe yaropi niyãi nosiye.

meat, animal flesh. yaropi.

don't stay at home, you will take strength (it is what is advised to young people to make them go to the forest to find food or to hunt). yahi ha kuo mai ke, wa rohotheri.

to take strength (said to young people to encourage them to go to the forest to find food or hunt). rohotheri.

he hung his hammock and lay down. ya e wãri yaai the ki wãri ha yãkini, a wãri perioma.

to hang a hammock. yããi.

1. To insist on, to persist in doing something despite an obstacle or difficulty. 2. To accumulate little by little, to carry out a task little by little; to cook a large amount of food in several stages. yãshi.

I take beads (I take a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to pick, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãoãi.

small one, don't bend your legs (keep them spread and straight, as a novice should during an initiation). shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai.

to sit or squat with legs spread and bent, to be in that position. preprekekei.

put out the flames and also it can be The word 'sheteke' in Yanomami means 'to carry'. koa wake sheteke.

put out. sheteke.

let the tobacco grow well, especially do not dry the leaves of very small plants. isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai.

to leave something to grow well, to let something grow properly. totihironi.

the false shamans interrupt their songs all the time. horemou ke the pe ã re haiwei the pe matha re waiatarou (cha.

interrupt songs. waiatarou.

fishing line, fishing cord. fmatiriawe ãsitha, uhea ãsitha.

to fish with a fishing line (jokingly). fmatiriawe kãpou.

fishing line, cord. fmatiriawe.

to prepare a substance (curare, a condiment) by leaching, pouring boiling water over a layer of a powdered product. kamãi.

tree; Anacardium giganteum (Anacardiaceae). witowito.

(name). ahe.

An almost adult monkey or any other arboreal mammal; it corresponds to the adolescence of humans. Mono o cualquier otro mamífero arborícola casi adulto; corresponde a la adolescencia de los humanos.

young. okotoma.

to reflect on something, to seek a solution. imikou.

they gathered (and then someone said). the pe yototai ha kuparuni.

to gather, to be gathered. yototoo.

1. Large amount of food. 2. Defend efficiently, resist with courage. wãrohãi.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied at different heights. mi wereheo.

to be tilted or unbalanced (e.g. a canoe), with one end higher than the other. werehekei.

to be surrounded. tipepei.

It has a white line. Pei waiparapi uu.

white line. waiparapi.

to pull out a tooth from the jaw (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetirei.

to be elevated, high. heru.

to shell corn. fy ono moku hushii.

shelled corn (perfective). yono moku hushirarei.

to shell corn. hushii.

to modify the meaning of another verb; verb modal. kumodiﬁca.

to gather standing. shirikiãi.

I spoke in a low voice, without shouting (without force), I was not heard. ikãri mrai, ya wã hiriprou ma re mraoprei.

to speak in a low voice, without shouting (without force), not to be heard. mraoprei.

he hurried as soon as night began to fall. pe the ka mi wai suprahatou tehe a wãri re horeprarouwei.

to be almost night, to be a little dark. upraha.

the traces they had left evoked misfortune (they all died by falling into a ravine). pe re kuaaiwei hami pe mãyo no wãi shi hiroprawe.

Horonãmi got lost precisely on the path of the Departed One. horonãmi a re yakei kuaaiwei.

a place where a deceased person was, or an act that they committed. kuaaiwei.

to be happy. wishawishami.

to raise the hand to chest height, with the palms facing up and moving the fingers, to indicate to someone to come. fimiki nakanakamou.

to raise the hand to chest height, with the palms facing up and moving the fingers, to indicate to someone to come. ku.

and if I transfer it to another pot. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to transfer, to pour from one container to another. heiai.

to be forming breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). hãkãmiprou.

edible fruit of the pasho ãhuhi shrub. ãhuthami.

(speech from upriver). temokoya.

my fireplace is next to an exit. ipa yãno nanokaa.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. nanokaa.

is he/she still alive. a mishiã hai shoawe.

is alive. shoawe.

daughter-in-law (wife of son, sister. yuhapi.

1. Fragment a bone by splitting it with a knife or machete, to make arrowheads for harpoon arrows. 2. Forcefully blow a dose of hallucinogen into someone. tikaroprai.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to tear off, to pull off. huhetiprarema.

quivers made from the thora bamboo. wana.

Rabipelado was far away for a while when he thought: "What if I fly. nãroriwe ke a payeketao waikio tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

to be far away, to have been away for a while. payeketao.

upriver language/dialect. sharurumi henaki.

wild plant (unidentified). sharuru.

say that to deceive. wa nomohori ha kuni.

trap, betrayal, trick, deception. nomohori.

to light, to set on fire. paraamai.

to break off branches. mãhoãi.

a multitude of fish shake their tails in the water. hei ke the pata riyoyoaprarou kupe.

to move in large numbers (fish shaking their tails). riyoyoaprarou.

while abandoning the dwelling to go live in the forest, the embers took flight (transformed into bees). the pe sipoprou tehe oshohore ke ki yeprou re kupariyowei.

to abandon the collective dwelling to camp in the forest. sipoprou.

to have the period. yaheteai.

speech from upriver. kufrãima sina.

speech from upriver. kufrãima.

to obtain numerous objects. prukarei.

los cambures raparimi caen siempre unos tras otros (cuando están maduros). raparimi pe prerei siihehewe.

to fall one after another. prariri.

I always respond to the demands of brave men. yãnomãmi kurahewe the pe riha ya the pe ã huamai si ihehewe.

brave. kurahewe.

we two, you and I, have shot arrows at the cows. kamiye yahekini ware yahe ki niyama.

you and I will do it. kamiye yahekini yahe the thape.

you and he/she, both of you (subjects of a transitive verb). yahekini.

others climb the pijiguao palms using two crossed sticks. ai rasha si pe hami pe hãikãmou, kanaa peni.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikiãi.

come mother. hore wape.

mother. wape.

that hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

to hurt someone. hamirayou.

there is honey everywhere (it is found, there is a lot of honey). pruka pe puu taprawe.

to have been discovered, to be visible, to be found in several places. taprawe.

it's going to rain heavily. maa a sutarayou.

to become dense, thick, heavy (in the center of something); to rain heavily. sutarayou.

the child is moaning. ihiru a re ãkãmiãmou.

to moan, to whimper. ãkãmiãm.

if you make me fall to the ground, even if you throw me violently against the ground, I will repel you in turn and hit your lower lip. ware ta sheyepari, ware sheyeprakema re ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni, pe hutosi yatikiamaiwe.

I will hit your lower lip. yatikiamaiwe.

to become many. yateheai.

to remain seated in a hammock for a long time. tipetao.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be damaged, crushed (end of a long object) [perfective]. thekehekei.

I'm going to make your tooth jump out (by hitting you). pe naki yutumarei.

to make someone stumble, throw a person by hitting or pushing violently; to eject, expel abruptly (by hitting). yutumarei.

give my younger brother some fish, whom we asked to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

give my little brother a share, whom we asked to accompany us. oãsiwe pema a re nokamapore, a ta topehe.

to ask someone to keep something or someone in a certain position. nokamapore.

we went to look for leaves, each one of us on their side. yama hena pe ha thaapotuni haye ya e hena ki omarema.

go hunt paujies (each one on their side). paruri ke a ta niyaapotuhe.

each one by their side. -apotayo.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to be reddish. teãyãwe.

as they were numerous they were crowded below, on the ground. pe the pe mathe pe ohotaa ha yaithoni.

numerous. thethea.

it is thin. a hepisi.

thin. hepisi.

to become a little greasy, to have a little fat after having been thin (and often, sick). shãrokoprou.

to hurt one's foot with a sharp object. fmamiki hiio.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to have a foot that resists penetration by a sharp object. fmamiki toukuprou.

foot. fmamiki.

Hokotoyoma had her hair cut regularly around her head (like a Yanomami woman). hokotoyoma ke the he wai yoothowe totihio yaioma.

to have hair cut regularly around the head (in the traditional Yanomami style). yoothowe.

to begin to speak well in ceremonial dialogues. karehai.

the cambur compote is becoming completely homogeneous. tate uku si uhutitiai.

to become completely soft or homogeneous (for a liquid or powder). uhutitiprou.

state of trembling or shivering. rutarutawe.

small earthen vessel. haprua ka umohoru.

consume totally oneself. watherei.

gavilán, ave de rapiña (Buteo sp). oko utha.

es tan hermoso el rostro de mi hija. shetemi a puhi riyeheo totihio tharea.

beautiful. riyeheo.

while we were eating, it became totally daylight. yamaki iyatii tehe yama the mi harua re hititimareiwei.

it became totally daylight. hititimareiwei.

to fart (once) in someone's face. mi horaprai: lanzar un pedo (una vez) en la cara de alguien.

to fart (once) in someone. horaprai.

to cough. othomorãyou.

to follow footprints. fmãyo nosi katitipou.

to follow a trail. katitipou.

to hang in the form of an arc (during the wayamou). tishakoo.

ayama: the Yanomami cassava flatbreads are made with two layers of flour on top of each other. ayama: las tortas de casabe yãnomãmi se hacen con dos capas de harina superpuestas. A flatbread is ayama when it still only has one layer. Una torta es ayama cuando todavía no tiene más que una sola capa.

I bake a cassava flatbread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

flatbread made from cassava. casabe.

Bushes or branches placed on a roof for the purpose of keeping the leaves that cover it in place.. shikoshikoma.

she is my mother, I call her mother. naye ke a, kama ke iha ya napemou.

mother. nape.

I soak the wapu fruits. wapu ya ki he paoai.

I will cover the wapu fruits with water (while cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to soak, to submerge. paoku.

a snake and also it can be The word 'oru' in Yanomami means 'snake'. oru ke ki.

snake. oru.

to reflect on something, to seek a solution. imikirayou.

bring here (on the back) a tangara bird (of the hehehemi species) from the Waika. waika hehehemi e siki ta yehimaparihe.

tangara bird. yehimaparihe.

to go. too.

to visit, to enter a dwelling (to visit it). yãno kapamai.

to leave leftovers, to keep leftovers for oneself. sheeprai.

they prepared gourds, as they intended to consume pijiguao porridge on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

he has the intention of passing by here again (he said so this morning). pe niya hayuo koo ke a kuprei.

to do something before leaving, to intend or desire to do something in the near future. riyã.

footprint, trail. mãyo.

to be in the center. mi thariai.

to be in the center, to be in the middle. thario.

Danta went to place herself on a thick divided branch. hiki hãkãrãpi pata kuope ha shamariwe ke a pata tikepareheroma.

to go to place oneself. hãkãrãpi.

to be soft or tender locally. uhutitia.

he ate it all and returned home in a state of being a killer and being satiated. a waa ha haikirini a unokai ha kopoherini, petiri (mit.

in a state of being a killer and being satiated. kopoherini.

the two red partridges gathered a cooked curled-up caterpillar. pokorami ke kipini kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepirema.

they two (he and she). hokepirema.

the moon has a musty smell. peripo a ni hoteri.

to smell musty. hoteri.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense a bow (perfective, plural subject, plural object). iyoararei.

to let someone pass, to allow someone to pass. hayuamai.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with the molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

crushed or consumed by crushing it with the molars. watikama.

to remove an arrowhead from its shaft in the described manner. frahaka yãweteãi.

to remove something that is attached to something else by pushing it slightly from side to side (e.g. removing an arrowhead from an arrow shaft). yãweterei.

I will come when the day begins to decrease. the mi shinayuãi tehe ya hupe.

after the fall of the sun. shinayurayou.

expresses the modality of inference. RVreshi.

when the child was perched (in the tree), a certain number (of women) stayed behind to bathe. hei ihiru a tiketia ha yaiikuni, ei naha the pe yãrimou ha heikuni.

to climb up, to perch. tiketia.

to drink. weikai.

to become a widow; to lose a child. mãrokãi.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to wage war. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to be at war, to wage war. iyãyorayou.

the fire extinguished immediately. koa wake misi ruprou shoarayoma.

to extinguish (a fire). ruprou.

they are the ones who saved me, if the Whites had not been there I would not have returned, I would have died there. ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuhahei, nape pe kuo mai kuoma ya kooyoruu mai ke the, ya nomaa hearayou ke a no kureshi.

they are the ones who saved me. ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuhahei.

(root word). kana.

sticky, gooey. sutia.

termite (unidentified (animal, plant)). fãoma.

to cut a piece of game meat to give as a gift. pakekekei.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

to grow a little, to begin to grow. preãkãi.

name given to various ferns, among others Metaxia rostrata, Triplophyllum funestum and Selaginella parkeri were identified. moimoi.

the man is angry. mamo kasi yakokorimi.

to be angry. yakokorimi.

I go. hi naka.

to go, to walk. hii*.

to cause. poteteamai.

Murciélago fue a agarrarse de un algarrobo muy alto. ã r o kohi yashokootayope ha heweriwe ke a wãri re sutiketayonowei.

he went to hang himself. sutiketayonowei.

I have lost (thrown away) mine. ipa ya hoyarema.

I don't have any of that. ipa a kuami.

mine, it. ipaye.

I'm going to have a dog gifted to me. hiima ipa ya praarei.

to get a dog as a gift, to have a dog gifted to oneself. praarei.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yanomami have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to pierce, to bore, to perforate by pressing with the hand (applying repeated blows); to give an injection, to inject. hiweheai.

to go ahead in reco-. pomiãi.

Leptodactylus bolivianus (a type of frog). hoãhoãmi.

1. To fragment a bone by splitting it with a knife or machete, to make harpoon arrowheads. 2. To forcefully blow a dose of hallucinogen into someone. tikaroa.

he felt bliss and sat on the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

1. to feel totally well, feel satisfaction or bliss, be happy 2. to be radiant, happy; to feel well (mentally or physically). puhi wãri.

intestine whose interior can be emptied (to eat it), by sliding it slowly between tightened fingers. piamou.

(myth). he, urihi hami hawe yaithawe the ã kuoma.

you have carved (the mortar) in an unknown (unsuitable) wood. sipara ke ya pe yaimai ma re toties adecuada.

different, of another type; unknown, chosen by another. yaithawe.

hold it firmly. a ta rohothoiku.

older brother, hold firmly for a moment. ãi a wãri ta rohothotaru.

to hold firmly for a while. rohothokei.

to cram, pack tightly. paimi.

they did not manage to easily lift the large rock. no lograron levantar fácilmente la gran roca.

rock. roca.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short log. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to roll up a leaf into a cone shape. oshokore.

to decorate totally several objects. yãhirirãrei.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe.

supernatural beings associated with the glowworm. amakurithaw.

buoy. poya.

the tender pulp of a fruit (for example, the pulp of the milky fruit that adheres to the shell). wãkekeãrei.

the demon (that knocks people down by kicking them) had just finished building a platform around a huge algarrobo tree, when Jaguar arrived. kãrãnãri ãro kohi pata yotoharimai tutoonowei ha, irariwe ke a pata waroo ha heparuni.

that has just been done or made. heparuni.

he tapped his teeth rapidly (with his index finger). pei e naki hupehupemoma.

to do something repeatedly or rapidly. -moma-.

you, the young ones, go hunt animals, kill prey. ihiru pe, miha yaroye ke a ta thahe, posheye ke a ta niyaprahe.

to kill animals for hunting. niyaprahe.

they intend to go to war, but they lie (because they are cowards). ya naiki thao.

he will go to look for meat for his father-in-law. pe the pe shiipi naiki thao totihiope re.

to be in search of meat; to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. thaope.

tiny demon. pe imiki remanio.

small, tiny. rera.

what am I going to say then when I participate in the ceremonial dialogue at night. weti naha ke a wãri kuu puhio yaro, wa the ã rãmai ta ke.

ceremonial dialogue. wayamou.

the silky fibers that envelop the seed of this tree. wari manaheki.

ceiba tree; Ceiba pentandra (Bombacaceae). manaheki.

to run extending the arms in front of oneself for protection. fimiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

extending the arms in front of oneself for protection. rerekewe.

to be hungry. nihioma.

to become thin at a point. hepisiprou.

to redden locally by the action of the sun. hetete.

part. parte.

the irokiri nope are all the time lying in their tiny vine hammocks. pei ke pe thoopi wai yai re kui irokiri ke nope ha wa pe shiro ta perihi thare (cha.

small. nope.

Have they finished painting themselves everywhere. wamaki yãmoã ta hititiraruhawe.

to paint, to color. heke.

(he) was urinating to put out the fire and also it can be The word 'wake' in Yanomami means 'to ignite'. wake niya misi ha ruamani.

flame. wake.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then they dropped the club. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

they threw it down. kemaparikirini.

he tore the loins off all the children. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

to return hurriedly, to rush back for a short time. auihiru.

they asked Scorpion: "You point at him. suhirina a nakamahe: "kaheni the ta niyapraayo. ". ".

they asked/requested (him/her). nakamahe.

the man had just become initiated as a shaman, he arrived near termites that were standing, with their heads covered with white down. yãnomãmi thaamamo no tute ke the, osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

to become initiated as a shaman. thaamamou.

to wait at home for someone's return. komãpei.

to wait at home. komãpei.

became fragile. nonirayou.

(the branches of) the horoeti trees break easily. horoeti hipe kreyou si ihehewe.

to break easily (said of fragile branches and certain trees). kreyou.

the Female-toucan with the pubis pululant with lice. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

the resplendent Female-toucans gathered together. mayepiriyoma ke pe riyehewe no shi harirawe, the ki tishoshai piyekoma.

Female spirit associated with the toucan. mayepiriyoma.

elbow (back part of the joint). esheenamopi.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to drop significantly before going to kill fish in it. thookororayou.

I will not wait to tell the others to strike you with the shaft of a bow (used as a lance), that is what I say. yetu hãto ke ya nahi pata kroshomotamarei ha, ei naha ya hoã kuu tao.

to start striking with a pointed object, to start lancing someone, to start killing with a harpoon-tipped arrow. kroshomotou.

to possess dried game meat or tobacco. shirikipou.

the Shamathari wove an open-weave basket, pressing the fibers together, and tied it to the child's ribs. shamatharini yorehi siki sheniniprai a ha tuyerini, ihiru repoku ha siki rekema.

a basket of open weave. sheniniprai.

I imitated the call of the gallineta bird, and it responded immediately. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

I imitated (something) and it responded immediately. nokaprariyoma.

to soften (something), to make (something) soft. krããhãmai.

he cut the baby's umbilical cord and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

he/she lay down with him/her in the hammock. shoatareiwei.

there were many people from Mahekoto who snored. mahekoto theri ke pe hohoruã re teteoperei.

snoring. hohoruã.

ya reconocí la planta de los yawari. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena noihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a noihipia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo noihipia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. pia.

habla de río arriba. sikro.

dispárenle flechas, que se muera. yama a wãri si hetimarema ke, a wãri ta mataru.

to kill by wounding, to kill with a weapon (lit.: to split the skin). hetimarema.

the gossip, the one who tells everything they saw or heard. weorewe.

the earth wall that blocks the burrow of the waraima lizard. waraima akatho heporashi.

a type of lizard that lives in underground cavities. waraima.

1. to spread out, scatter. 2. To attract an object towards oneself that is out of reach of the hand, bringing it closer with the body or with a stick.. hãrãreãi.

machete. hãyovada.

he approached to see. the mii mi re ikukeiwei.

to approach, to get close. ikukei.

to pluck the feathers of. mi hukukuai.

los que estaban curándose mutuamente (en la casa) se callaron. the pe nohi re reayouwei the matha re waiprap e i.

to cure each other. *prope.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to have nothing more to eat in one. hãrokore.

food (game, fish, etc.) that swells and rises to the surface of the water in which it is cooked. hitei.

to be just a little bit soft. fepehehehe.

to be in a hurry. wayumo.

I have been denouncing it for a long time. ya wã katititao ma re kui.

to do something for a long time, to have been doing something for a long time. katititao.

I am not a child. ihiru ke ya ma re mai.

Vocative used by an elder to address young people. fihiru pe, ihiru pewe.

Soon I will engender a child. ya ihirupi thao ropaope.

Your son will be brave (lit: you will give birth with pain). wa ihirupi wayuope.

child, boy. fihiru.

to cut a piece of game meat for oneself. pakekerei.

del otro lado Tilingo multibandeado agrandó a su vez la cavidad del peñasco. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

enlarged a cavity. yawetemakei.

I will go to the powerful hekuras' houses, and direct them towards you (making them spin). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make an object spin or rotate many times. hãmorimai.

I will get myself painted with lines if they want. ãiwe ke iha ya oni eyekamou.

to get oneself painted with lines. eyekamou.

he has stopped breathing (he is dead). a herekou mrat a r i y o m a.

to breathe. hereke.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. hãto yama nahi ha thatathatataani, nimoko vb.

to become painful, to feel pain. niniãi.

the ancestors who received the celestial disk on their heads immediately became amahiri. hetu misini no patapi pe re sheparenowei, amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

ancestors who received the celestial disk on their heads and immediately became amahiri (mythical beings). amahiprou.

to strike blows on top, to nail. pasuakei.

as the mother (of her daughter-in-law) kept crying, the father of Tucán took pity on her. pe nii e miã he weyaa ha mayepirithawe pe hiini e ã nohi ohote thaarema.

to receive a person, to welcome. ropou.

he brought her nipple close (and said): "Soon, bite my nipple. pei hãkãmi totoo piyeoma: "yare hãkãmi ta wetipraa".

bite me. wetipraa.

ven aquí a agarrarlo. a ta teakipiyoru.

ven aquí a agarrarlo. teakipiyoru.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to keep pressed down, to keep in place a light object by placing a heavier one on top of it. patetepou.

I brought all the ones I needed. ya the hiki ma re oa waide.

to bring. waide.

having been unraveled, untwisted, or frayed (plural objects). kushesherariyo.

to be impelled downwards. ikokopou.

to be decorated with semicircles. parokow.

to become ripe, to begin to ripen by changing hue (fruit). shopoai.

the little bird broods. kirithami a makea.

to be placed on top of something; to brood (for a bird). makea.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the jungle. Õmawe y su hermano describieron una curva en la selva.

described. kipi.

the one who habitually performs the action indicated by the verbal root (feminine form). -remi.

to be happy. shãrishãri henaki.

to be happy. shãrishãri.

as we do not have a shotgun to hunt, I will kill you with my arrows in turn; upstream speech. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani, ihi a ma kuini pe wãri prapou mi fetuo ta totihio.

upstream. ithãpore.

softened vine. yaprotema.

to be about to have a curved line painted on one. hiporoshipramou.

to speak in a low voice. wahatomou.

Rahararithawe's daughter was dancing raising and lowering her arms rhythmically. rahararithawe ke theepi imiki yokoai kuaama.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically. imiki yoko-.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to be stiff, rigid. hitatawe.

canalete. kanareto.

how?. ¿cómo?.

to habitually offer (two prey). hãkohãi.

to receive, to obtain (two prey). hãkohopei.

to offer someone two prey from different animals. hãkohoãi.

they took a bath to purify their body that smelled, accompanying closely. ke kipi ni hithãri pakokai kuaai re paki shoatariyowei.

to be dragged, to accompany closely. paki.

the ancestors did not take into account (lit. e ki wãri kuu mai, pe yaweremou no motaai.

brothers and sisters. pe yaweremou.

he is there. yotho natho hi.

to be. yotho.

wood that has been split in that way. yahekima no,: madera que ha sido partida de esa manera.

broken wood. yahekima.

picure. yorehi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). hãnãpi.

to walk at a certain distance from the others. prihão.

to shave one. mãrokoshiprou.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to be arranged in a circular manner, to form a circular arc. wathowe.

to lie on belly or already be lying on belly. rehoo.

to crackle. shãishãimou.

Exclamation uttered when someone gets wet or comes into contact with a cold object. hiã!.

to make (something cylindrical) roll or spin repeatedly. hamorimai.

to make (something cylindrical) roll or spin repeatedly. hamorimai.

perfective form. rããmomarei.

when we had finished surrounding them, the enemy warriors did not respond (to our shouts and insults). wayu pe ã hai mi hetuonomi, yãnomãmi re the pe he hãyoprou tehe.

to surround them. hetuonomi.

to cause to have pain in the foot (from a blow or wound). yutukupramai.

to tell someone to leave a part of something for oneself to take. ayamapei.

he/she has wrinkled buttocks (offensive in front of the person). a koroku wãikiwe.

wrinkled, dented (in several parts or over the entire surface). wãikiprawe.

to advance through muddy ground. kaweheaprarou.

1. To become soft, muddy, marshy. 2. To seize with claws (bird of prey). 3. To fight by striking with feet (a bird).. kawehe.

The váquiro bird took a shortcut going directly through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to take a shortcut through the forest. tiherirayou.

towards. aba-.

(speech of upriver). poshotomi.

to let meat get worm-infested through negligence. moshapiamai.

leaves that stop being rigid. fhenaki teããi.

to prepare a substance (curare, a condiment) by leaching, pouring boiling water over a layer of a pulverized product. kamikei.

he stopped, thirsty, every time he passed near a hole with dark and foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

Water collected in holes and depressions. oyokore.

to have received a dose of hallucinogen blown forcefully into one. tikaroprapei.

to form a (or several) blister(s) on the hand. fimiki si posho.

to have a blister. si poshoa.

the bark of the ayukuma tree peels off easily. ayukuma a si poshowe.

to have a blister. poshoa.

man who, in life, was a good bird hunter. fhiki poko nohi peyepou.

good bird hunter. peyepou.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

to have a superficial wound. yahea.

stream of water. u wiriri.

stream of water. wiriri.

although I lack matches, I do not say: "I will work to get matches" (lit. ya ma horimou tehe, "pohoroye ya hiki no ohote ta thaa sho", ya kuu mai.

to have no intention of working to obtain something. pohoroye.

it is necessary that you tie together again the strips of your hammock. wahe thoku he okãã ha kopani.

to have begotten a male child (in a ceremonial dialogue). fipa ya he okãpe.

to tie, to bind, to fasten. okãpe.

to have pubic hair that has grown. weshirayou.

a fish bone is getting stuck in my throat. yuri ya niosi hããi.

a fish bone will get stuck in your throat. wa niosi hããrei.

to get a fish bone stuck in the throat. hããrei.

to pinch someone with the nails (once). tirii.

fish with fleshy lips. Prochilodus.

flashlight. pira.

to shake vigorously the hand (generally to remove a dangerous insect). yãwethoprai.

to make dizzy, to cause dizziness; to make spin. yãwethomai.

yo no me daré prisa en mostrarme and also it can be The word 'tapramou' in Yanomami means 'show oneself, appear, have a certain appearance'. k a m iye ya tapramou haio mai ke the.

they stopped being visible. pe taprou mratou shoarayoma.

hurry. tapramou.

housefly. potoma.

to have a palpitating stomach. fãmoku preipreiw e.

stomach. fãmoku.

be silent and listen. kahiki ta reparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

be silent and listen. wã hiri.

spiny plant; Solanum sp. (Solanaceae). mohomi misiki.

I don. siekeekeemi.

walk like peas, one after the other in a long line (in silence). hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihii.

to become deformed, to become hard like leather, to twist. prithothoai.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to move around for a while on a summit. pororotou.

stepped on the ground with his foot (to have luck during his search). snudó el suelo con el pie (para tener suerte durante su búsqueda).

stepped on the ground. snudó.

he let himself be killed uselessly by the men (lit. yãnomãmi ke the pe iha yaro ke a wãri hore suhamou tot i h i o m a.

1. That can be swallowed. 2. To let oneself be swallowed, to let oneself be killed.. suhamou.

la nutria se desplazaba (hacia ellos), estirando el cuello en algunos sitios (por encima del agua). wãi katiatarou ha kooimani.

stretching the neck in some places (over the water). kooimani.

to become untied. moshokoreai.

to become less concentrated, less thick. rehereprou.

to be slightly tense, to be horizontal, to be extended horizontally. rerehe.

I cannot walk fast when the pain in my thigh becomes more intense. e naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

when the pain in the thigh becomes more intense. ropaaimi.

I will go to look for powerful hekuras in their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make a cylindrical or approximately round object pivot or rotate on itself, making it describe less than a half turn. hãmoriãi.

to receive. tikaropei.

rotten (plural object). tarerariyo.

to do it with a quiver (the deceased is a man). thora no kãi preaprarou.

to cry for a dead person by dancing in the central plaza of the dwelling while carrying an object that belonged to them. matohi*.

to burn someone once with a glowing ember. hisikiai.

directly, through the jungle. he tiheri hami.

to take a shortcut, go directly through. tiheri.

1. Synonym of . fperio shimakao.

I crushed the wasp between my fingers. kopina ya na hutikiprarema.

I crushed it between my fingers. hutikiprarema.

remember all of you that your isolation has already caused you much unhappiness. a no yãmiri preaprarou waikioma tao, wamaki puﬁ wãri kuu fa hatukeomopotuni.

to be alone (in a given situation, to do something). yãmiri.

the jaguar howled in pain and rubbed against the trees. ira ke a rããmorayoma, hii ke hiki hami a hãrikiãprarama.

rubbed against. hãrikiãprarama.

when you obtain a good hunting dog, you show satisfaction (by saying: ae minahami). yama e hiyoka wãi koãi ha, ae minahami.

to show satisfaction (when obtaining a good hunting dog or avenging the death of a good hunter). minahami.

to limp, to hobble. kayehewe.

1. covered with fog, misty 2. to pluck to offer. hukosi.

to start smoothing/making smooth and wet. frakahaprai.

he wants to share the food of others and now he likes this house (where he is treated well). a ni niya ha rioni pe yahi puhiprai waikirayoma re.

to start using a new substance (tobacco, hallucinogen) or to eat a food that one did not want before. puhiprai.

a. una.

to receive. tikaropei.

perfective of the durative, plural object (of hahetimai). hahetirarei.

supernatural being, yai the. It takes possession of the vital principle (pei mi ãmo) and causes rain. peshiemiriwe.

give me that dog (lit. hei a re houhoumowei, a ta prapari.

dog. houhoumowei.

in the eyes, there where the worms climbed, termites swarm. ereerema re kona shipe rãirãiprarou.

to swarm, to teem. rãi.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, and thrust the point into the shaft and sat down by the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to thrust, to drive in forcefully. tisuakei.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal or plant). prushiima.

to have curved nails. torekewe.

to widen progressively towards the edge (in a conical or bell shape). ehete.

to crush or flatten multiple objects by striking with a stick (perfective aspect). yatikiakei.

after my departure (on the occasion of your death), the fragments of your calcined bones will be thrown (out of the mortar where they will be crushed). wamaki ishi pe wãri akatahu yutuhou heowe.

thanks to the pore henaki the people upriver can spit magic plants. pore henaki wayu ha ora theri ke pe pehiki yutuhou kure.

fragment, piece, part. yutuhou.

to start dividing, to begin separating. shetekepramou.

to replace or succeed under. pepipraai.

his wife was underneath, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

to place an object underneath or at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pehitheai.

(mit. poo ke hetho ha pee nahe makepoma.

tobacco. fpee.

to start crushing a soft object with the foot; to start stepping on a dangerous object. karukuprai.

oh father of mine, appear. hapemi a ta petaru.

I shot an arrow at him as soon as he appeared. a petou tehe ya the niya shoakema.

Siroromi appeared when the great fire was burning. wake pata wauwaumou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

to appear, to become visible, to manifest, to make noise. petaru.

the váquiros (birds) are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothoprawe.

cállate, suegro, deja de amenazar. shoape, mamikai, a wã teteotihe.

to threaten someone. teteotihe.

dejar secar, prender fuego y esparcir las brasas. shirikimarini, wake yerini, wa ha yãrãreãrini.

to leave to dry. shirikimarini.

come miel (he/she/it eats honey). puu upe ta wari.

to eat. fsherei.

yo lo buscaré circundando (el sitio). hei re ya the taeai ãyokãi totihio kuperei.

to circle around, to go around. ikimoi.

my son, here comes the buzzing that precedes (and announces) the arrival of the puriwa. a reãã wã re pariimi ye.

vivid red decorative element that enters into the attire of the hekura. reúpuriwa.

but as I did not stay still, it (the hekura attribute) turned back. kamiye ke ya he ha reshiproni a he tatokema.

to turn back, to go back. tatokema.

to be afraid. mapehero.

1. to have a vertigo, a dizziness 2. to lose all point of reference, to get confused, to not recognize oneself 3. to regularly get vertigos. mi pe shiwãrihi.

1. To have a convex mark (hollowed out, and caused by pressure) around the entire circumference (cylindrical or spherical object); to be carved, circularly reduced. 2. To be grooved or channeled circularly by natural causes.. esheheprawe.

to make an object thicker in all its dimensions. supramarei.

to pretend to be stupid, to feign ignorance. wã mohotumou.

to pretend not to know, to feign ignorance. mohotumou.

I'm going to hurry up to do it first. ya the wapepraai ta shoshokeai.

to hurry up, to do something quickly. wapepraai.

dog that pursues the main herd of cattle. tihetipou.

in all the points of the trees against which he had rubbed his bloodied penis, transverse stains were seen. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to clean, wipe, erase, soil completely. hãhitarei.

do it without wasting an instant. the ta thaa moyaweaprara.

as they had harvested honey without wasting time, we drank it (mixed with water, as a drink). puu u pe thaa ha moyaweapotuheni, yama u pe koarar e m a.

to do quickly, to do without wasting time. moyaweaprara.

Shu. shu. (personal name), the one who has a rough forehead (insult). huko wãri re ãrokiwei a wãri re periope.

to have been completely dried or smoked. ãrokima no.

to dry, to harden. ãroki.

He kept the ant nest on the ground near him. konakona pe pesi prapou heweoma.

Here is a turtle (on the ground). hei totori pe praa kur e.

1. To conserve something on the ground. 2. To beat, kill someone. 3. To be placed on the ground, to be situated in a certain place, to occupy a certain area (field, dwelling).. pramapou.

the rock wall of the mountain is very high and there is a piapoco perched on it. pei ke maki tirewe totihiwe hami, iha mayepi ke a kãi re rorakiri (cha.

Intensifier used in the . pashi.

to hold someone while another person hits them. huwetai.

to help someone, to help someone during work or combat; to accompany, to help a sick person, a child, an elderly person. payerikei.

tomorrow you will give me a gift. h enaha yare huko sheyeape.

to give a gift. huko sheyekei.

it descended upon me (to help me combat the demon that is in the sick person). sipararithawe ye cha.

to descend upon (to help combat the demon that is in the sick person). sipararithawe.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãpreketou.

that conuco is yours (yours and theirs). kahe wamaki hikaripi theka.

that. kahe.

to be or put in a container or cavity. titihi.

he is always saying funny or unusual things. wã heomi o wã heo mai.

to be always saying funny or unusual things. heomi.

the women will see the neck of the calabash covered with white down. ke pe wãrini shokãtãma ke kahiki horoi mii totiinmediatamente.

covered with white down. fhoroi.

to begin to have milk (a woman). suhemoãi.

to bathe. yãrimorayou.

we are not angry. yamaki ã rahumou mai.

to get angry, to shout angrily while speaking. rahuhou.

he stopped being angry and that's why he renounced taking revenge. a wã rii ha okeheatarani a puhi rii aithaatarouwei a rii ma re kui.

to renounce (a demand, a debt, an aggression). okeheatarani.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall seriously ill. parohoai.

edible fruits of this tree. arowaye ãsi.

tree; Zizyphus cinnamomum (Rhamnaceae). arowaye.

to dry, to become dry. washi.

to have wrinkled buttocks. fkoroku rukuwe.

buttocks, rump. ruk.

they surrounded the rock wall of the mountain. pei re maki kothe hami the pe ãyorima.

rock wall. kothe.

the wasp nest whose (tubular) opening is curved. kopina moroshi re payokoi.

curved, hooked, having the shape of an arc of circumference, being completely curved. payokoi.

the wariomi koheshi spiders move around. wariomi koheshiki erekou.

manner of climbing trees: the arms surround the trunk, while the feet, almost together and parallel to the body axis, simply grip the trunk. koheshiki.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while observing the surroundings (when an attack is feared). fkohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; in birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. fkohesi.

I have the urge to vomit. ya no suharayopi.

I have the urge to vomit. suharayopi.

to knead the cassava flour so that some liquid remains inside it. eramai.

he opened the hammock he was carrying, and lay down for a while. abierto el chinchorro que traía, y se tendió un buen rato.

he was in his hammock and swinging with his foot while whistling. estaba en su chinchorro y se balanceaba con el pie mientras silbaba.

hammock. chinchorro.

interjection said while pulling down the lower eyelid and staring at someone (offensive). he! he!.

to tie something by winding it around itself repeatedly. ãtetemou.

your child will be brave (lit. nini manaheheproimi, nini wãnonoproimi fwa ihirupi niniope.

child. nini.

"you have had a slip of the tongue", this is the news that I will truly spread. "wa aka tihekia re yaipe", a wãno wã thaprai yaia kutaeni.

to have made many mistakes while speaking, to have spoken incorrectly habitually. tihekimorãyou.

we went down to the water a little further upriver. yamaki ithoa orahakema.

to be a little upriver. oraprawe.

to stand on tiptoe. wareai.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

to become spacious (a cavity, a hole, the interior of an object). yawetai.

to dry up (terminative aspect). hashitiprou.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to redden slightly, to become reddish. teãyã.

she cooked cassava bread and put them in a mapire. nashi ﬁki ha rãmirãrini yoroﬁ si ha ﬁki thaprarema.

put in a mapire (basket). thaprarema.

don't think you can hold me immobile by grabbing me around the waist. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to hold a person immobile by grabbing them around the waist. hãrokopou.

the sun is inclining towards the horizon. the misi pata yahatotoherii.

to descend, to come down, to lower. yahatotoai.

he tied leaves to a stick, added a firebrand, and started climbing again. horotowe ke the hi ha yãã ke henaki ha okãpani, iha kai wake kãi yetea ha shoamakini, the torerea re kopeheriiwei.

to add, to attach. shoamakini.

factitive. to.

to shorten something. onohokei.

they have stolen my knife. siparaye si a thomiremahe.

they have stolen. thomiremahe.

dar vuelta la cabeza. oraki frikihi.

to turn one. frikihi.

to be a little yellow. ffrãrãhã.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

indicates that what is produced has something to do with a center or with the speaker (or with some of their very personal possessions), with fire, water, above or below. -mapa-.

they (two) leaned the palm stem against a tree. hii ke hi ha yei ke amo shãhe hãthãpikema.

to lean against something, to be leaning against something. hãthão.

round object broken into several pieces in that way. wahathoma.

the feathers of the crested curassow surround the base of its spear points, observe them well. pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

to be habitually prohibited around something. ãyoyowe.

to blow on the fire. koa wake ta horapa.

to blow on a fire for a long time, several times in a row (to light it, to revive it, to reanimate it). koa wake horai.

brother, here is an excellent palmito. ãi, yei ke ãmo wai wãnipraa kure.

term of kinship, vocative; designates any direct blood relative, older, and male (male or female speakers): older brother, paternal cousin, father or grandfather, father. ãi.

the wasps sting us, they release their arrows. kopinani yamareki tikararei, shereka pe huheamakei.

they release their arrows. huheamakei.

to acquire thickness, density or volume. supra.

I took out the ocumos (from the boiling water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to put something at a distance, to leave something behind. pakema.

she left the mark of her passage through the corn field. kihami re mo siki yãrãruã thaa re shoareheriiwei.

to leave a mark on the vegetation when passing through it. yãrãruã.

the Yanomami man arrived home carrying the woman on his back. yãnomãmi ke the suwe ha yehireherini a kãi kopema.

he carried her on his back. yehireherini.

wild yam (Dioscoreaceae), with dark gray pulp. mamohiyomi.

yo no me daré prisa en mostrarme and also it can be The word 'tapramou' in Yanomami means 'show oneself, appear, have a certain appearance'. k a m iye ya tapramou haio mai ke the.

they stopped being visible. pe taprou mratou shoarayoma.

hurry. tapramou.

funeral pyre, oblique pole in temporary shelter roof. yaritha.

they (the two) knocked down bunches of pijiguao fruits with a stick. rasha ke ki rekapima.

to bring closer with a stick an object that is difficult to reach. rekapima.

Are you full. wa puhi tikrou.

to be full, satiated. saciado.

to bend or fold me. mi itutu.

I was walking on the path when he came to meet me. pei yo hami ya huu tehe a mi hetuama.

to go to meet someone; to come to see someone. hetuama.

to become a good hunter (person or dog). suhir i n a p r o u: hacerse un buen cazador (persona o perro).

to become a good hunter. suhi.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

disappeared behind or under. shãhokema.

it seems that they crossed (the river) at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami e pe ãhã pekatuatayoma.

to cross. pekatukei.

they hurried to shave the old woman's head, and then they threw her into the water. patayoma the he shi hariwe hopaheni, a sheyepareihe.

they threw her into the water. sheyepareihe.

as the place was clear I discovered it immediately. the wawetope ha ya the pomiã re shoakeiwei.

to discover, notice something in the jungle. wawetope.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something outside before entering a dwelling. henapema.

obtain, give or receive. pãyerekeãi.

(myth): while Jaguar lay (unconscious) on the ground, they descended again. suekoruni (mit.

ground, floor. suekoruni.

to paint, to draw a transverse line. oni*.

female equivalent of puriwatoriwe. puriwayoma.

go and stand/put yourselves over there. kihami ke pe ta kupraru.

go and position yourself over there. kihami ke a wãri ta kuroheri.

to go and stand/put oneself somewhere, to position oneself. kupraru.

to become completely darker. huteprou.

to twist the trunk, making a rotating movement. ãkoto.

they returned to dry land and gathered with us. pe hashirikei, pe warokei.

to disembark one after the other. ashiripraai.

to fold the edge of something (perfective form of the incompletive verb). yapurekei.

we built the house after clearing the vegetation. yama nahi thai re shoapeiwei, yãkumi yama the ha waweprarini.

to show, to present. waweamai.

to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, sick person or elderly person to urinate. niaasi keyemai.

to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, sick person or elderly person to urinate. keyemai.

to produce several portions by tearing, separating or dividing a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hahathorarei.

to sleep. mio.

I met them (in the sky, in the land of souls). ya kuo nareopeherayou kuhe.

(form that the directional vhv-rayo takes in the presence of the perfective -pe). peherayo.

with a thin cord of the "whites", with this cord, I will strangle you. nape ke ãsithani, friyawa ke ani, pe orãmi shiãri.

unroll your fishing line, and catch the fish there. wa ãsitha ha kushereni, kihi waho ki re titirati, ki ta shaire.

thin cord or thread. ãsithani.

to agitate in front of oneself, while advancing, a handful of leafy branches, as if sweeping the floor, to reintegrate the noreshi of a sick person. yãhãroãkei.

"nos va a despellejar", pensó él. "yamareki si niya ikekai".

to skin, to peel. mo*.

the demons of the night passed. weyari pe re hayuyonowei.

the demons of the night passed. hayuyonowei.

the hekura launched the snake very far from downstream, they launched it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

they launched it over everything towards me. morokãimaiwehei.

to make love, to have sex. riprai.

to soften a bark. si uhutitiprai.

to make a liquid or powder completely homogeneous. uhutitim.

correa de la guatura. posi ikekeorewe.

correa que se usa para transportar una guatura haciéndola pasar por el fondo. ikekeorewe.

(he) allowed (someone) to catch up. he waro.

to allow someone to catch up (by walking slowly or stopping). waromakei.

to harvest honey by breaking the hive into pieces. fpuu poprai.

to harvest honey (by striking to open the hive). fpuu tuyei.

to harvest honey by breaking the hive into pieces (by striking from above). fpuu.

to fold, pleat (several times on itself) the edge of something, to make a hem on the edge of a fabric by making several folds. kohemai.

to lead a person by holding their hand or arm (a child, a blind person). ipipou.

her pregnancy was very visible, her husband was going to be stunned when he arrived. suwe ke e maka tiyeria ha, pe heãropi ke e ãmoku keprohorope.

to be in an advanced state of pregnancy (humorous). tiyetirami.

to make a little fat. preãkããmai.

the demon of the night was perched on a branch that was bent towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma.

curved, bent. hithoreope.

to divide a piece of meat or a wad of tobacco into many parts, to offer them. hakokai.

to start making something with a wide surface. thepahaprai.

wapu hikeai, inc. wapu hikeai, inc. : to cut the wapu fruit into slices after cooking it for a long time in water, and before soaking it in running water. : cortar en tajadas el fruto wapu después de haberlo cocido mucho tiempo en agua, y antes de ponerlo a remojar en agua corriente.

to cut the wapu fruit into slices. wapu hike.

to divide into several groups (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). shetekerayou.

he gave ripe plantains to some and others. kuratha re ke ki wake hipea ha shetekeapotuni.

divide, split, separate a part from a whole. shetekai.

you yourself have become brave (lit. waitheri a no mãyo hami nosiyeriweni wa na.

to become brave/valiant. nosiyeriweni.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisirayou.

snout, muzzle of certain mammals (tapir, danta, etc.). ﬁyokasi.

to bite a food while sucking at the same time to absorb the juice or pulp. wateteai.

I am closing the mapire (tying its edges). yorehi ya si he itutuai.

to close a basket by bringing the opposite edges together and tying them. itutuai.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed when falling to the ground (a single object). tikuhai.

por más que tú pienses "yo tengo un viejo fusil remendado con un alambre". hei kopetaye ya wãri ãrãprepi ta thaporani.

wire. ãrãprepi.

I don't make any noise of broken branch (I don't make any noise), I just walk dragging myself. krai.

do something in vain, without thinking or carelessly; be content with; happen without apparent reason, happen by chance. krai!.

él desplumó a Titiri (disparándole una dardo con una cerbatana). titiri u pe re tishishireiwei (mit.

he desplumó (desplumó a Titiri disparándole una dardo con una cerbatana). tishishireiwei.

to have become a little fat, to have a little fat after having been thin (and often, sick). shãrokorãriyo.

to improve (health state). kuyeherayou.

to swell and harden the belly until it hurts. ipreteprou.

(see related forms). hesika.

water strider. motohewe.

to boil vigorously. krothakrothamou.

to be hungry. yotete.

he was behaving like a 'White' person. hei a re napemope.

to behave like a . kitanaripou.

he caught several bocones (fish). mãrohã ki pata rekepotii re kupariyowei.

to catch several fish. rekepotii.

I run the risk of cutting my finger. haniprariyopi.

Please, here we have to start being cautious. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to start taking precautions, to become attentive (when one was previously unconcerned). yawetou.

to get wet, to become damp. hereai.

in the past the Waika did not know the croaking of the little frog wawa hena. waika ke peni wawa ke the hena wã hapa tanomihe.

did not know. tanomihe.

(they purify) with 'the water of the hekura'. hekura pe mãupi.

formula used by shamans when purifying a patient with . mãupi.

to extend, to spread out, to become wide. hauhou.

to cut off a piece, to remove a portion by cutting (with a tool resting on the object, cutting guided by the back-and-forth movement of the arm). hãniãkei.

to be hardened, twisted, deformed locally. tosheshea.

they had built the camp, and they went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one by which they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a beast that was pursuing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to exceed (in quantity, in length), to go beyond (a limit), to leave behind. torerayoma.

a beast usually lies in ambush here, there is a beast lying in ambush. yaro a yetekou re ahetoimi, yaro a re yetekopi yei.

we left the palm grove behind and then lay in ambush again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to ambush, to lie in wait. fyeteke.

cuando ustedes lanzan los demonios de la enfermedad (no wãri) en dirección a seres humanos, éstos convergen hacia ellos (para contaminarlos). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

converge. prukaoprou.

to cram, pack tightly. hãroko.

they found the jaguar dead, it was swollen and lying on its back. ira a nomawe tararemahe, a pata shuweturoma, a mi pata rekekepraoma.

to be lying on one. rekekepraoma.

to place a thick layer of leaves on a roof to waterproof it. sutapei.

they messed up your hair when cutting it, they messed it up without you realizing. wa the miki wãriãi totihionomahe, wa miki wãriãnoma.

to mess up, to disarrange (e.g. hair). wãriãi.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. fniya hupamou maorewe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. fniya.

the himo wasps became possessed by the ãiãmo demon. himo ke ki ãiãmoprou ha kuparuni (cha.

to be possessed by the ãiãmo demon and become fierce like it. ãiãmoprou.

that one who is sitting at the edge (of the group we form). kasi hami a re roowei.

he went along the edge of the river. parawa u kasi hami a huma.

edge, border, periphery, margin. kasi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). ãototu.

to laugh. wehehe.

it seems that those who went on reconnaissance have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

to discover, to notice something in the forest. pomikei.

cremation. rante.

to lie on belly momentarily. rehotou.

Encyclopedic dictionary of the Yanomami language and also it can be The word 'tahiapi' in Yanomami means 'night'. Diccionario enciclopédico de la lengua yãnomãmi tahiapi.

a guabina yace in the sand. mashapi a pata tahiapi paa.

dictionary. tahiapi.

to climb rapidly. hithehithemoherii.

¡atención, sus voces se hunden bajo tierra. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

to sink, to submerge, to disappear into something. ohou.

to be (epistemic modality). kuperei.

little child who does not yet know how to behave. mohotutawe.

bowl in which banana compote is served to hosts during a party. karafa.

in the lobe of his ears he put the tail feathers of a parrot. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the teshinaki hore ha huuararini.

lobe of the ear. huuararini.

I don. koyotohima.

to not feel very well. tharehai.

following Woman-palm the songs are directed here. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

Woman-palm. okosiyoma.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

discern, see, distinguish clearly. hirahapou.

they danced, they participated in the presentation dance. the ki iriamoma, the pe praiama.

they danced, they participated in the presentation dance. iriamoma.

I descended the other slope. ya mohe hotepariyoma.

descended the other slope. hotepariyoma.

their hands were tiny. pe imiki remanio.

tiny, minuscule. remami.

Mujer-curare desmenuzó un trozo de su piel y lo dejó caer en la garganta del hijo de Jaguar. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema.

yo desgrano maíz. yono ya mope hushishai.

desmenuzó, pulverizó con los dedos, resquebrajó dentro de la mano. hushishironi.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, to break or grab (perfective, plural object). yãmonirarei.

to place vertically, to put vertical. yororoãmai.

1. Take a large amount of food. 2. Defend oneself efficiently, resist with courage. wãrohoãi.

everyone left, they abandoned the communal dwelling. pe komi hua shoarayoma, pe no rii maprou re shoarayouwei.

the children disappeared immediately. ihiru pe no mraa re shoatareiwei.

to go away, leave, disappear, be absent. mr.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the hãihãi bird (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

a type of bird; Lipaugus vociferans (Tyrannidae). hãihãi.

The gamopetalous flower of the ware nahi tree is fragrant and women like to carry it (the baby) on their backs. ipa wãware na ware na: ﬂor gamopétala del árbol ware nahi, es remashi a re rukepiyei ha, yai the kipi ã no re kimuy perfumada y a las mujeres les gusta llevarripiyei e.

to carry (a baby) on one. llevarripiyei.

to divide in two. hakokoprai.

to receive leftovers. mra.

to be locally wrinkled, crumpled or soft. wãpreteã.

Jaguar went around to take another path. ai ke yo hami ira a ãyoã re mahikeiwei (mit.

I have opened the path there (thus going around the obstacle). iha pei ya mayo pahetia ãyoã shoareherima.

to go around, to bypass. ãyo.

the earth collapsed and everyone fell into the stream. mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururayoma (mit.

earth, ground, soil. mashitha.

to receive leftovers. miwathe.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakaamai.

your wives deny you tobacco and keep you in need of it. suwepihe pe shi ha imaoni pee ke wama nahe pe ha horipoheni.

to keep someone in a state of need or deprivation. horipoheni.

he will reappear here. a petou kooyorupe.

to appear, become visible, manifest. wãwe.

go to lie down over there. a ta periikutu.

go to lie down over there. periikutu.

he lives with the "Whites" and shares their food, surely his tongue has become numb (= he does not know how to assert his rights, he does not know how to express himself). nape a re periope, a ni riape ha, aka wãri moyepiai ke the.

to share someone. riariyo.

to get hurt (cut, scratch, gash), to make or have a long mark. yakekeo.

"he had not told himself that the fruits were extremely hard and that it was better to give up on them". "the prohohowemi ha ya the ha ta tiratai", a kunomi.

to be firmly tied, to be tied by a very tight rope. prohohowemi.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pamento sin.

to scatter, to spread out. ensanprarirou.

to be completely wrinkled or crumpled. ãpreteprou.

to dilute in water; to wash with water, to purify by means of a liquid. yaru.

to breastfeed. fsuhe upe koai.

to breastfeed. fsuhe.

to have a borrowed object. mahipou.

they transformed into supernatural beings in front of themselves by waving burning sticks. paruri pema pe yãikirayou.

to illuminate by waving burning sticks. yãikirayou.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

1. to twist, flatten; 2. to shoot many arrows at a target without hitting it; 3. to create unrest around someone by gathering or through constant agitation. tishiki.

He/it launched blowing (the deadly substance), and he fell immediately. Horonami lanzó soplando (la susde hacernos huir).

he/it launched blowing (the deadly substance). horonami.

weeds, vegetation that regrows on land that has been previously cleared or burned. kaukau.

the day is about to rise (the speaker is in the house). the mi uhehepei.

to widen, to open up. wãhete.

while they were crying for the death of the dog. a no miã potiihe tehe.

to cry. potiihe.

to become infested with worms. moshapirayou.

characterized by the same phonological conditioning. waikiokema.

It is very bitter. The payahawemi.

to lose bitterness (of poisonous fruit). payaha.

to extinguish (a fire) completely. ãkikiprou.

to have a recurring headache. yayumou.

to injure oneself with the tip of a sharp object. hiio: lastimarse con la extremidad de un objeto puntiagudo.

to place at the end. hii.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (plural objects). yakekerarei.

family. familiar.

The giant Spirit-cachicamo looks at us with the corner of his eye. wakariwe mamo re repotaruhe ye.

to look with the corner of the eye. repokei.

to remember (after having reviewed in memory), to find a solution to a difficulty. taeprou.

cracked in several places (plural objects). nashorariyo.

to be beautiful, to grow well (only some plants). tiriria.

to shoot arrows one after the other. ehimopraai.

to be occupied, to have the will to work. ohetrabajar.

to break into pieces, to crumble. nahihiprou.

to remove part of a plant. tikarokei.

to be stingy. noshi ima.

mother-in-law, go get water so I can drink. yape, miha mãu u ta yakea, ya u ta koa.

I go to get water. mãu ya u yakeai.

to get (using a container), to go get water. yakeai.

to breathe rapidly, to be panting. hereheremou.

an extensive region. aka praukuwe y aka hauhuwe.

vast, spacious, extending over a large area. hauhuwe.

he felt bliss and sat on the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

1. to feel totally well, feel satisfaction or bliss, be happy 2. to be radiant, happy; to feel well (mentally or physically). puhi wãri.

to leave something to become deformed or hardened (by negligence). prithothamai.

to clash against each other (speaking of the seed necklaces tied to the women's loincloth). tiritirimo.

to clash against each other (speaking of the seed necklaces tied to the women. tiritirimo.

he filled the hollow of the tree up to the brim with honey. hii ke hi ka ha puu u pe pata manikamama (mit.

to fill up to the brim. manikamama.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go out first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, to warn, to advise, to notify. yimirai.

the beloved child. ihiru nohio.

to love tenderly in a lasting way, to feel an intense and lasting affection; to tenderly love those who are no longer there. nohio.

the rock started moving slowly towards the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki rakiariyoma (mit.

while we were sitting, the sun moved slowly to this place in the sky. heyeha mothoka wai kuariyo iha re yamaki roo heai shoao t e h e.

to put slowly into motion, to start moving slowly. rakiariyoma.

Canalete (proper name). Canalete.

Manner that they have. kãhiãmou.

(speaks of upriver). shofema.

to have the urge to lay eggs. nathe ihe.

to have the urge to defecate. shi ihe.

to have the urge to, to want to (within specific expressions). keye.

to let pass beyond, to let go beyond. torehemakei.

to break the shell of. poshoamo.

to remove by lifting with the nail. tiyo.

cross it around my chest (= give me a necklace). weti ipa ke ki ta yakirapari.

to carry crossed over the chest (a cotton thread or bead necklace). yakirapou.

there is a dead tapir (that the hunter left abandoned in that state because he could not carry it alone). shama the pata yeemapou re kupiyei.

to possess, to have, to keep. yee.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

in. en.

the sun advances, it approaches the horizon. kihi mothoka kuaai kure, pe the hiririwe ke, pe the hirirou totihia ke a kure.

to approach the horizon (celestial body). hiriri.

to be very small. kotãkotãmo.

suegro, suegro, aquí está la miel (de la especie mashipuma). shoape, shoapemi, hei mashipuma ke a kua kure.

a type of honey. mashipuma.

to decorate oneself, to adorn oneself with feathers or bird skins. paushiprai.

she is my mother, I call her mother. naye ke a, kama ke iha ya napemou.

to call someone mother, to be related as mother and child. napemou.

they slept again. pe mio koomahe.

slept again. koomahe.

to open more the edges of a container or vessel. uhehekei.

to have. iki.

to start cutting something so that its end becomes completely flat and smooth. simitiprai.

confront each other only with sticks, do not tie knives to the tips. pe ta wapayo, hii ke hi shironi, sipara wama si hiihãi mai.

to confront, to face off, to fight. wapa.

she was about to flee with her father. pe hii ke iha a mori tokuu tehe a huwerema.

I will go only if I get better and also it can be The word 'mori' in Yanomami means 'night'. mori ya harou tehe ya shiro huu tao.

to be about to, to be on the verge of. mori.

plant/animal classifier. sunama akasi.

classifier. sunama.

I will go to get powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them spin). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

I will direct them towards you (making them spin). shoakeyoruu.

I turned my torso to the side and, bending, tensed my bow. re ya nahi ikokai tutakaoma.

I turned my torso to the side and, bending, tensed my bow. tutakaoma.

to obtain little, to receive little, to kill many prey. wairei.

to wait until it gets a little daylight (to do something). uhehetamai.

as the woman was in love with him, she fled with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

to make a woman flee or facilitate her escape; to flee in the company of a woman one loves. puhiani.

to sway, to swing (especially when carrying objects on the back). maimaimo.

they intend to go to war, but they lie (because they are cowards). ya naiki thao.

he will go in search of meat for his father-in-law. pe the pe shiipi naiki thao totihiope re.

(he) went in search of vegetables for himself and his family. ni thaokei.

to go in search of food with meat; to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. thaoprou.

I have just killed a woman. mã u ya u riprarei kuhe.

to kill (a woman). riprarei.

¿por qué está enojado. weti the ha a hushuo.

enojado. hushuo.

to have weeded. kaumorayou.

long ago the rocks were empty (the hekura did not yet live in them). hapa proke ke ma kupramoma.

Õmawe shook empty branches to deceive him. omaweni horehore proke ke the henaki raekema.

empty, to return empty-handed. proke.

(see related forms). porepore.

prukai, it. prukai, it. : to be cured several times in a row by a shaman; to be requested several times in a row by a patient that one cures. : ser curado varias veces seguidas por un chamán; ser solicitado varias veces seguidas por un paciente que uno cu.

to cure. cu-.

it is wrinkled, it is creased. si wãikiã.

wrinkled, creased. wãikiã.

they break easily. se rompen fácilmente.

easily. fácilmente.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. ropakeiwei.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter on the ground (fruits). yapikirayou.

the bees have stung me so much that my scalp hurts. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

the termites will hollow out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororop r a r e i.

skull, cranium, scalp; shell (of a turtle, crab, cachicamo). ereerema.

to be about to have oneself painted by someone. yakirapramorãyou.

I get paid (for my work). ya no ohote koãmãi.

The visitors no longer come because they don't give anything in return for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

to restore, reimburse, grant something in return or compensation, give an object in exchange for another. koãmãi.

to cry, to have tears in the eyes. mapu upe hai.

in. upe.

your legs are covered in veins. wa mãtha mãthoyãh i p i.

vein, artery; nerve. mãthoyãh.

that one, there, who plays/entertains in the water (referring to the tapir during ceremonial dialogue). mihi a pata re iriamope.

one who plays/entertains in the water (referring to the tapir during ceremonial dialogue). iriamope.

to strike someone on the head, on the back, in that manner. tuyepei.

I took the bow without arrows and leaned on it to walk. hãto mãroko ya nahi re tereiwei, ya paihou kuaaherima.

to lean on, to support oneself with. tereiwei.

to roll over when falling. yoririai.

1. To coin, wedge, imprison. 2. To put an object under the arm.. hãkiãi.

to make war, to fight. rahakapi.

on the path, he wants to embed it on a rock. pei ke maki ha e the shatimai puhioherii yaro.

to embed, to stick into. shatimai.

(he/she) piles tobacco leaves. pee nahe ithoriãi.

to pile tobacco leaves on top of each other and make balls to keep them dry. ithori.

brother-in-law, above all do not insinuate that it is dirty. shori, shami himai tikootihe.

to ask someone how to do something, to get oneself taught, to get oneself shown. himãmai.

to hold someone while another person hits them. huwetarei.

Baba had the habit of going to the river banks to cook his packages of caterpillars over the coals. aka wapiwei ke u ha iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

they turn over the packages that are roasting over the coals. pe hãro mi hapei re kupeiwehei.

package of food wrapped in leaves to be cooked over the coals. wapiwei.

in the place where the muddy bottom emerges above the water. u katikatipi re repiyeti ha.

muddy bottom that emerges from the water during the dry season. repiyeti.

I'm going to give you a blow on the head. pe he yokepei.

to give someone a blow on the head. yokepei.

to tie something tightly by wrapping it several times with a vine. ikreherarei.

on the path he transformed into a supernatural being. a yaiprariyoherima (mit.

supernatural. yãihihi.

to become weak, to lose strength; to become crippled, senile. shikopiãi.

come here, get closer to her. eyemi ke a ta ahetetaru.

the váquiros are near here. ahete ha ke pe ki hiraa kurai.

to approach, to get closer. ahetetaru.

he got angry and left, abandoning the banana plants. a fa huoshuoni siki taa fa shoakeferini.

I left leaving an arrow in the house, which the women broke in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

to abandon, to leave something or someone in a place, to leave alone. huoshuoni.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

discern, see, distinguish clearly. hirahapou.

to be thinner due to. repisi.

to burn, to suffer a burn, to turn brown from heat. frãnãpiamai.

father-in-law, he wants to come here to skin us both. shoape, pehereki si niya re ikekeaimi ye.

us two (you and me), we two (in object position). pehereki.

Siroromi crushed his entire body, and when he had finished he dug his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

to crush by squeezing with the fingers. hutikia.

I go. yo* mi hinowe.

to go. yo*.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cocoa plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma (mit.

to take different directions (summit of a tree, end of a branch); to sink. rãkokoprou.

child. niño.

to make love in a hammock, to convert it into a place where love was made. kokopiamai.

to break it in two. wenikiprai.

to loosen, to untie, to let escape. oa.

the rapasimi fish are full of spines. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

she was very beautiful. riyehewe heparohowe a wãri kuoma.

very, extremely. eparohowe.

to grab (a person) with all one. huweherarei.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk. waroroprou.

an ancestor accompanied the winged termites to the sky and thus saw the souls. poreporeri osheri ke pe rii ha the ha nikereroherini, hetu misi hami no porepi pe tararema.

accompanied the winged termites to the sky. nikereroherini.

dart. dardo.

they cut bushes into pieces that they used as levers to move the huge penis. hii ke hi ha pahetirariheni, the mo pata hirurama.

to cut into pieces (perfective aspect of durative). pahetirarei.

he breaks, he runs over. u pakayumou.

to break, to run over. pakayumo.

to swell and harden the belly until it hurts. ipreteprou.

Follow me. Nosi yuai pe kuma.

to accompany, to follow someone. nosi yuai.

separate several strips (of bark) from this tree. wa e natha ki ha hiririprarini.

to separate several strips (of bark). hiririprarini.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. hironomi.

to trace sinuous lines on the jaw and cheeks, starting from the corner of the lips. kahiki tikekekou.

to trace lines. tikeke-.

1. Yam with violet flesh. 2. Name sometimes given to the purple cambur.. yãpihirimi.

the hekura made me lose my power. hekura peni yare puhi yashurema.

to lose one. yashurei.

after having been moving slowly, Deer then went quickly. hayariwe ke poko siki hoã ha hairápido (después de haber estado desplazándose kiraruni, a rerei shoaoma).

to walk/go quickly. kiraruni.

I really want meat. y a naiki totihiwe.

cannibal hummingbirds live on the river bank. teshori naikia theri ke pe hiraa kupe.

to eat meat or fish. naikai.

to have rolled up (a cord or thread by letting it fall slowly while exerting a circular motion on it). yoririkei.

to divide a tobacco leaf in two following the central vein. pee nahe repokosi.

to divide, to split, to break apart. kosi.

What relation do you have with my younger brother, to whom I give shelter. kihi feesheye ya nohi re thaapraiwei iha, weti naha wa e kuu totihia kurawe.

my younger male relative, my younger brother. feesheye.

they did not grind the bones of the deceased, although they were fragmented (reduced to ashes). pei ishi pe kãi tikai mahei, oshohore ke ki ma kopehou totihio tehe.

to be fragmented, to be reduced to ashes. kopehou.

they burned the dead person today. hei tehe pe pomorayoma.

to burn a dead person. pomorayou.

to be agitated by the wind. shurishurimou.

the rain was approaching. maa ke pe pata huimaperei.

the rain was approaching. huimaperei.

the house of the h e k ura sways from side to side (while being transported). yahi wa hute pata ta ataataaprarou thare.

to sway from side to side. ataataaprarou.

to move by an impulse. hiruruprou.

to become completely darker. huteprou.

I roast a banana on the coals. kuratha ya yaai.

to roast on coals. yaai.

the Espíritu-guacamaya tends the ear to listen. arariwe e he re aharape.

to turn one. aharaa.

to join a group that is leaving. aushiramomento.

I went to get firewood (and threw myself on a fire), that's how I became corpulent. ya thariki ha tharoni, ya prerayou kurei (mit.

firewood. tharoni.

to scatter the embers (for clearing land). yareshe (para realizar una quema de terreno).

to break into several pieces; to scatter the embers (for clearing land). yareshekei.

atacar a los enemigos. fnape shurukai.

to attack enemies. fnape.

stay calm. yãnikiwe a ta kuiku.

we have built the house without rushing. kamiye yamakini yãniki yama nahi thama.

tranquil, calm; to do something calmly, without hurry. yãnikiwe.

to speak in a low voice, to emit a faint sound. wãhãnono.

much, in great quantity. namuy.

they (two) leaned the scaffold on the sharp edge of Mount Sipara. sipara ke V.

sharp edge or blade of an object. makepia.

wasp (unidentified (animal, plant)). ihirãma.

send your mother there to harvest corn, there where the branches emerge, downriver. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to pass across the water (long object, branch). shorokoprou.

don't eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

don. hãthoikuhe.

on the summit, on the peak (of a mountain, of a hill). fpororo hami.

two. hami.

to be completely rolled up in a spiral, to be folded over itself several times. yapurewe.

the m. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati (cha. was completely yellowed by the smoke. ).

to acquire reflections, to acquire this tonality locally, to dye or paint yellow, to dye something with a yellowish annatto, to have this tone locally, to have been painted locally with a yellowish color, or dirtied by smoke, to be completely painted or dyed a yellowish color, to have become completely yellowed by smoke. frãihiã.

to listen, to have been informed. yimikai.

to be inferior to, to be shorter than. hawewe.

the two claws of a crab. pei yorahepiki.

claw of a crustacean, particularly of a crab. yorahepi.

they (the hekura) could not lift the great rock easily, and it oscillated (in their hands). pei maki hereheprai ha maparuheni, pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma (cha.

to lighten, to lift easily. hereherei.

without delay Toucan propped up his arrows. mayepirithawe shereka ke ki rakitaa ha yaimakini.

to lean against, to prop up. rakitaa.

to be occupied in various places at once. reshirei.

he came, left a termite nest on the ground, and went back to look for another. ai e koko ha prakiherini, ai ke e koko yuai mi hua re korayonow e i.

another, other. korayonow.

(he/she) speaks upriver. atowa shiﬁ.

upriver. atowa.

(upstream talk): —Do you complain that you lack tobacco. herãmi pe sherekapi au (mit. —Yes. ) (habla de río arriba.

to be white, to be clean. au1.

although it is very far away, bring me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. yaferii.

golden-headed manakin (a type of bird). ãrikinãmi.

it acquires that color. mishi teãpiãi.

to acquire a certain color that certain plant products take on when oxidized, such as potatoes and cassava after a certain time after being peeled, or the color that certain banana compotes take on if not consumed immediately. teãpiãi.

we built the house after clearing the vegetation. yama nahi thai re shoapeiwei, yãkumi yama the ha waweprarini.

to show, to present. waweamai.

he hung the cambur shells. e siki re rukekenowei.

he hung. rukekenowei.

to put oneself in a hip position. kaihikei.

to have entrusted an object, or a child, to someone. hemapou.

(in) arari: el pue-. pue.

generic term applied to macaws. pue-.

encarámense (sobre la plataforma) uno al lado del otro. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

Horonami se detuvo de inmediato y aguzó el oído. horonami yimika taa kãi upraa ha shoaikuni.

one next to the other, side by side. shoaikuni.

to go. ãrehe*we.

when he cut the liana the tree loosened abruptly. thoo thotho peprai tehe a pehi kãi yokerayoherima.

to loosen abruptly, to launch a magical substance by flicking, to catch a fish with a hook or fishing line. yokeai.

to be afraid of the jaguar. purima ãhushi.

to be afraid. ãhushi.

to hang. he ãtete.

hizo deslizar a la tortuga de arriba a abajo (y dijo): "¡muérdeme el mentón. totori ke a yohotamai piyeama: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

mentón. werina.

hole where crabs live. oko eyoshi.

hole where babillas (fish) live. iwa eyoshi.

Cavity, den of certain animals located on the banks of streams. yoshi.

to produce whirlpools in the water with one. kapokai.

I will hang the little deer from the hole in the lobe of my ear (to carry it). kamiyeni pei ya yimikaki ha preãri ya wai huuai shoaowe.

I take a funerary gourd (lit. ipa ya ãhuku huuai.

lobe of the ear. huuai.

se diría que las mujeres tienen la costumbre de venir aquí a matar peces. eyeha yuri ke a no wãri shepraai yaimopihe, suwe peni.

to come here. yaimopihe.

to have light eyes. hushuhu.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantity. yatehou.

to cause several trees to fall in the same direction by felling a larger tree (during clearing). pakakumarei.

in this point the water is not deep (speaking of the south of the Orinoco river). iha the pe henasio totihio tharei.

to be thin, shallow, or not thick, locally. henasia.

if you make me fall to the ground, even if you throw me violently against the ground, I will repel you in turn and hit your lower lip. ware ta sheyepari, ware sheyeprakema re ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni, pe hutosi yatikiamaiwe.

I will hit your lower lip. yatikiamaiwe.

a large animal died, lying on the ground. fthe pata tekeria.

an animal lying dead on the ground. tekeria.

(myth): he caught a small monster rahara, grabbed it, and then offered it to the Yanomami (as a pet). keki ha yukuni yãnomãmi pe rii ha keki hipea shoapeheroma (mit.

small monster. rahara.

frog. shãkohã.

to go hunting. apotayo.

to detest, to hate. nohi wãriãi.

to detest, to hate. wãriãi.

kamonene: bot. kamonene: bot. , aquatic plant (unidentified (animal, plant)). , planta acuática (no identificado (animal, planta)).

aquatic plant (unidentified). kamonene.

select, choose carefully. tooai.

el crepúsculo cayó cuando él llegó al Monte-de-los-Saltamontes. sekisekimapiwei the hehu hami a he weyama.

Monte-de-los-Saltamontes (a place name). ekisekimapiwei.

to receive a good amount of. hothethepei.

we walked under the komorã palms. erima: anduvimos bajo las palmas komorã si.

we walked under the komorã palms. erima.

tell someone to work in the fields. fhikarimomai.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

the people of Tayari shot their arrows from afar, many arrows that missed the target. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikaihe, pruka shereka ke ki tishikamahe.

a place name. Tayari.

to be afraid. pohoru.

en el conuco hay muchos racimos de plátanos (colgando de las plantas). hikari theka hami kuratha a perikiwe.

colgados en gran número (como personas en chorros). fperiki.

the tapir was infested with ticks. shama a toripioma.

to have ticks, to be infested with ticks. toripi.

make slightly curved the wall of an object that is being made. wãhetemai.

con esos bambúes inclinados haré puntas de flecha. pe ihirupi a suhaaiyepe ka ha tharini.

puntas de flecha. suhaaiyepe.

the path extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

to walk through the forest (termination). yashokoprou.

hesi tahapi: to have no hair, pe- V. hesi tahapi: no tener cabellos, pe- V. eshãmi. eshãmi.

to lack, to be without. pe-.

the people of río arriba use such narrow guayucos that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

to be straddled, to straddle. yakaro.

a type of tree; Pourouma sp. (Cecropiaceae). wapanawe.

the son of Õmawe (a h e k u r a) struck the thing with a machete, and it broke. omawe ke ihirupini the ki re yakekeprareiwei, the ki hetirayoma.

to fight against a supernatural being by striking it with a machete. yakekeprai.

a small catfish. e bagre pequeño.

catfish. bagre.

there is a wide open space (in the middle of the vegetation). the ka yakeo prahawe.

we left the arrow canes (to dry in the sun) in a place where the trees left a piece of sky uncovered. the misi ka yakeo kuope ha yama pe shereka ropramai.

to have slid through vegetation (perfective form). yakerayou.

vean que vuelve a hacerse de día. pe the haruu koo ke a re kuimi.

su vigilancia cedió en el momento en que se aproximaba el día (se durmió y) roncó. pe the haru oweai totihioimai tehe, a puhi ha mrataruni, a hohoruãmoma.

él despertó en el momento en que rompía el día. the haruu uheheprou tehe a rãrãyoma.

to be day, daylight. haruo.

null. maputupi.

he will die. pe wãri ahipe.

when you have a nightmare, the one that makes you feel strange is the dream spirit. wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi a h i m a r i.

to die, to cool down, to get old (for wood). ahiprou.

it is our house. kamiye peheki nopi.

we are sick. kamiye peheki hariri.

we who will go (he and I). kamiye pehekini pehe a niyaprarema.

we two, us two. pehe-.

he wants to share the food of others and now he likes this house (where he is treated well). a ni niya ha rioni pe yahi puhiprai waikirayoma re.

to like, appreciate; to start using a new substance (tobacco, hallucinogen) or to eat a food that one didn. puhiai.

for whom and why are they having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriamoãi ta sihewe.

they are having fun. iriamoãi.

branches or a tree fell across a path. mohe yoamakei.

to fall (branches or a tree across a path). yoamakei.

los Waika viven allá y fabrican puntas de bambú shiiwe. ei rahaka shiiwe ki re peyepiyei.

puntas de bambú. peyepiyei.

the jaguar roared, its tail shook. yashuma: el jaguar rugió, su cola se estremeció.

to tremble, to shiver, to shake (from cold or due to an illness). yatiyatimo.

to desgarrar or recortar longitudinally (terminative form). eririprou.

to be hungry. ãyãhã.

to doze off, to fall asleep. hererewe.

I'm not going to hurry to show myself. kamiye ya tapramou haio mai ke the.

they are not found, they are invisible. pe taproimi totihiwe ke a thare.

to show oneself, to let oneself be seen. taarariyo.

to receive an object that has been taken off. hayupei.

when you dream Mahariri it scares you (= it gives you nightmares). wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi ahimari.

to dream constantly. kurama.

the Yawari woman has transformed me, let my mental faculties change then. yãwãriyoma ware shi ha wãrimarini, ya puhi aithaa ta toithipe.

to transform, to change someone. wãrimarini.

bluish-gray color. mishi teãpi.

bluish-gray. teãpi.

the paujíes perched one after the other on top of the monster rahara. rahara ke ki hetupi hami paruri ke ki ropraama.

to perch, to roost. ropraama.

the man was moving while continuing to tightly compress Siroromi. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to bore a hole by compressing, constricting or tightening something firmly. ãkikiprai.

hiervan raíces de yuca y dénle de comer. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

yuca (root). nashiki.

to bury stakes of a defensive palisade tightly together. hisinirei.

rib. reponahi.

go and stand/put yourselves over there. kihami ke pe ta kupraru.

go and position yourself over there. kihami ke a wãri ta kuroheri.

to go and stand/put oneself somewhere, to position oneself. kupraru.

past tense suffix. moke.

(the water) becomes turbid. u ushishiprou.

to become turbid or dark green (of water). ushishiprou.

to wait for a food to acquire a floury consistency. hotetiamai.

the souls invited them one by one, until the last one. yãmona kiha re ma pe peso a hi kãi tiyei re kukeiwehei, yetu the hi hoã kãi ha haikiapotuheni.

to execute a task quickly. haiprai.

1. to swell and harden the belly until it hurts, 2. to have a swollen, hard and painful stomach. iprete.

to cover an object or hide it behind something to prevent theft. shãhotai.

"of the 'white' women who make jokes, give me one of their belongings", you will say that. "ei yãwãriyoma pe re iriamope, weti ipa napeyoma ke a", wa re kutouwei.

to say something, to utter words. kutouwei.

to be totally decorated with crosses. oni yakiraprawe.

to be totally decorated with crosses. yakiraprawe.

(to speak of upriver). krimo.

to smooth, to make smooth. frakah.

to attack someone. nohi nakao.

to attack someone. nakao.

cotton fibers. shinari uku.

hair; short feather or down; fiber. krepo.

he buried his nails in the top of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

top of the skull. eyoshipe.

don't you say that you don't have any more tobacco. wa hoã ma re horiwei.

everyone knows that the tapirs are infested with ticks. shama pe ma re toripiwei.

they are not pijiguao (it is evident). rasha ke ki hore ma re mai.

it is evident, it is obvious. horiwei.

noise that arrows make. tãrãtãrãi.

divide your wad of tobacco into two. pee nahe hakoprai.

to divide a wad of tobacco into two equal parts. hakoprai.

to have given birth (a woman). reshirayou.

the hekura that transmigrates, the hekura that leaves the body of a dead shaman to join another living one, bringing it within reach by means of a stick. haprapi hekura que transmigra, hekura que abandona el ra del alcance de la mano, acercándolo con el cuerpo de un chamán muerto para unirse a otro pie o con un palo.

The Yanomami quickly enlarge the area of a garden clearing by well spreading the embers and ashes. hãnomãmi ke the pe yahipi niya ha taepoheni haprarãretai.

to recover an object for someone else. kurãrekei.

they put the váquiros to cook. ware pe hariaihe.

they put to cook. hariaihe.

to start diminishing, shrinking, narrowing. wãisipiprai.

blunted, dull. he pohotowe.

to become blunt or dull by successive impacts (arrow tip). pohotai.

tree; Mouriria grandiflora (Melastomataceae). grandiflora.

they live on the other side of the mountain. hehu a yapuru hami pe peria.

on the other side, over the other slope (of an elevation of terrain). fyapuru.

when we address each other, we only use the term ãi. yahe e ki ãiãprao totihio.

to say ãi (term for older male relative) many times in succession. ãiãprao.

to lean long objects against each other. hirikimai.

to be in a curled up position with legs bent against the chest. pushukuo.

to eat quickly in that way (humorous). krãrikrãrimou.

to crunch, to eat a food that crunches between the teeth. krãriãi.

Space that is freed. yakeai.

it is here where the disease demon has been fastened (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye.

to tie tightly, to fasten firmly. atete.

over the shoulders and over the tail he placed a basket. pei hakoki hami, pei teshina ha yorehi ke e si kãi re shatimakeiwei (mit.

shoulder. hakoki.

to strain to defecate or fart. wãthemorayou.

to paint several objects white. pintar de blanco varios objetos.

to paint. pintar.

we will pierce their bodies with arrows. pemaki pehi kãi wãri wahepramai totihirayou.

to hit a living target and make them fall. wahepramai.

to clean or paint multiple objects white. aumararei.

the women went to break thin sticks by hand for the roofs of the temporary shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of a temporary shelter. fhurohuroma.

to amplify (noise, voice). nakreai.

displace yourselves in a row (and silently), like the chachacos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to be aligned in a row (durative aspect). shaninou.

teeth of picures. fthomi nape.

teeth. fthomi.

to be decorated in that form with a hand. raokoa.

plantas de yuca. haionomi.

I'm going to make your tooth jump out (by hitting you). pe naki yutumarei.

to make someone stumble, throw a person by hitting or pushing violently; to eject, expel abruptly (by hitting). yutumarei.

the tábanos have a flattened sucking beak. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

flat, horizontal (the end of an elongated object, especially a stick or piece of wood). tatahai.

I only take a dose of the yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi ya ki ayaai.

I collect only a part of the fruits. himohimo ya ki ayaai.

to cook food over hot coals; to offer roasted food to someone. yaamai.

we lived by the river, it was then that they began to detest us. para ke u ha wamare nohi wãrirema.

since I detest them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

to feel resentment towards someone. wãrirema.

post that supports the roof of a shapono that is not aligned with the others. tharihiwe.

to fill the bottom of. paweai.

esta cola habrá de cocinarse, habrá que quemar los pelos. shina the wãri tuope, pei pe mi hamope.

To desplumar (pluck feathers), depilar (remove hair), quemar el pelaje (burn fur/hair). fra.

weyape (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue): the fish stays in the water until the evening (= all day). weyape (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

until the evening (= all day). weyape.

a little fluid. fhereshihi.

él le ofreció un recipiente repleto de compota de plátano. poreaweni tate u pe ithãkema.

plátano. oreaweni.

noise made by a more or less hard object inside a rigid container when shaken: noise of lechosa seeds, noise of chicks in the egg when shaken, etc.. rokorokomou.

ah, the woman could no longer stop laughing. suwe ke a ikã wã shoai ha tikothoni (mit.

laughter. ikã wã.

It infests very large spiders (hãho, wariomi kohesi) by laying its eggs inside them. Infesta a arañas muy grandes (hãho, wariomi kohesi) poniendo sus huevos dentro de ellas.

large hymenopteran similar to a hornet (unidentified (animal, plant)). warerea.

we put the arrow to dry (by the river bank). yama a mi shereka hai re kupeiwei.

some gallinetas (birds) came close (to the river bank). paruri ke ki ikupema.

in what direction is the river closer. weti ha pawara ke u ahetea kupe.

locative suffix indicating proximity to water or river. -pe.

to wear out a little. rurohoai.

to bend, to curve. payoko.

to adhere something to someone. raoprai.

to clear vegetation with the foot to open a path (upriver dialect). krake.

overgrown (especially a conuco or a path). yasikirei.

the cassava root emerges to the surface of the soil. nashi koko urewe.

to emerge completely. ureprawe.

I will kick you. pe kahathorei.

And if I kick him/her. ya wãri ta kahatho sho.

to kick. kahathorei.

I am hungry. orakawe ãhi.

to be hungry. orakawe.

she was about to flee with her father. pe hii ke iha a mori tokuu tehe a huwerema.

I will go only if I get better and also it can be The word 'mori' in Yanomami means 'night'. mori ya harou tehe ya shiro huu tao.

to be about to, to be on the verge of. mori.

to do everything until the end. ya niaata el ﬁnal, realizarlo todo.

to always want. haimou.

if you insist, I will let myself be killed. wa hua he ha yatirini, wa shemoparu (mit.

to let oneself be hit in the chest or stomach, to let oneself be killed at the river. shemoparei.

plant used to prepare a mauve dye (unidentified plant). hueekoweshi.

(related word). shihihu.

give it to me for nothing. no mai ha a ta hiyo.

offer me a curare tip for nothing. ipa no mai ha namo ta totopa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

for nothing, without payment. no mai ha.

I don't believe at all that you will stop wanting to eat meat, that's why I object (to that gift). wamaki naiki mraaV.

to object, to disagree, to oppose (something said, an opinion, a decision); to refuse (to give something). wãreke.

to bend, to curve something. ithoremai.

supernatural bees, hekura bees. oi hoari naki.

supernatural bees, hekura bees. hoari.

to have hiccups. shokomomai.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

made (someone) stagger. ataterayou.

he leaned the yagua palm stem along the tree. hii ke hi ha yei ke ãmo hiririmakema.

to lean or rest something along. hiririmakei.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense a bow quickly or for a brief moment. iyotai.

lay down the child. ihiru a ta perimaki.

they laid him down dead. no prewe a ha perimakiheni.

to lay down, to make lie down. perimaki.

to see in dreams people from whom one is separated, or to see distant places. kuramarei.

to be decorated with a pattern of two crossed lines. yãhiriã.

the woman remained lying down, indifferent to what was happening. suwe ke the mohotiri peritaoma.

to remain lying down, indifferent. mohotiri.

black jaguar. tururumi mosi.

large black feline (unidentified), probably a black jaguar. tururumi.

what can be mixed by stirring with the fingertips (powders). tikuramou.

to be hungry. hãihã.

to become a widow; to lose a child. mãrokãi.

to break intentionally a long and rigid object by stepping on it. kahekirei.

to go very far, to move away. yaheriai: 1.

to go far away, to pass from one side to another. yaheri.

they went towards the house of the h e k u r a. h e k u r a kama pe yahi hami pe rii kuaai re shoaonowei.

they went. shoaonowei.

path that goes down a slope. timiwe.

to place something leaning against a long object, to put something along a tree or house post. hiririãmai.

ember. koa wake anamahu.

ember. anamahu.

to be resolved. puhi yopraai.

to be resolved, to advance resolutely. yopraai.

to become vertical, to put vertical. wapoai.

we slowly raised our necks to see. opisi ke yamaki oraki yarehou.

to raise. alzar.

and then I will drink the broth of the stew. y después me beberé el caldo del cocido.

I will drink. beberé.

look at me. a mi ta yaitaru.

look at me. yaitaru.

they are dead. pe tokurariyoma.

to be dead. tokurayo.

to go outside. enconmapei.

to be hungry. shonama.

not to be deep (the water level). etehewe.

cassava plants. diatamente.

to make concave, to hollow out. hopokai.

who else did you go with. weti sho waheki huma.

who else. weti sho.

we quickly split the firewood and they put the váquiros to cook. yetu koã yama ãsho ha pathothokuni, ware pe hariaihe.

he caught a small rahara monster, grabbed it, and then offered it to the Yanomami (as a pet animal). rahara ke ki horoi huwerema, keki ha yukuni yãnomãmi pe rii ha keki hipea shoapeheroma (mit.

perfective suffix indicating completed action. pathothokuni.

(related word). shiihe.

to be partially clean or white. aushia.

small circular basket. sus.

let go, release. fufe.

those bamboos inclined, I will cut them to make bamboo tips, with which I will inflict wounds. hei sikoropirimi ki re raipe ya rii ha hãithoreni, ya iye pe ka ha tharini.

to inflict wounds, to injure. tharini.

long object that can be cut into pieces. tihetipramou.

to cut the end of a long object (applying a downward blow with a sharp object). tiheti.

to be happy. moheoami.

their corpses were strewn on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

they found the black-painted sorcerers strewn (dead) on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe (mit.

to scatter, spread, strew on the ground. tikukamai.

the earth crumbles. mashitha a hishiai.

it was no use putting stones (to plug the holes), the water undermined the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

being undermined, mined (perfective). hishiarei.

it is because the hekura guarantee the otter its protection. hekura peni proro ke a wãhã hayumapou yaro.

1. To be convinced of someone. hayupou.

to cut. atar.

to tie a capuchin monkey's tail around one's head. t si yohoai.

to tie a capuchin monkey. yohoaprai.

to clean, to polish (several objects). shutukahemai.

he lowered the tortuga (making it slide along its body) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to make slide down, to lower. yohoãi.

Rana arched her back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch, to be arched. hiketeo.

oh you, woman, return to us immediately. wa siki kãi mi yapaa shoari.

woman. siki.

they took a long time to find the case (that contained the feathers for adornment). yãkumi kanapo si tararemahe.

after a long time, his legs became short and bent, he came out painfully and returned home. yãkumi the mamiki yerea ha totihiarini, yãkumi re a ha harini a kopema.

for a long time. yãkumi.

numerous kashi ants float on the edge of the water. para u kasi hami kashi pe pruka karorowe.

to be on top of the water, to float. karorowe.

his two younger brothers returned from hunting. pe feeshe e kipi rami kopema (habla de río arriba.

your younger male relative, your younger brother. feeshehe.

Jaguar was left behind, and arrived weakened by hunger. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

to be weak, without strength; to have lost vitality; to have wrinkled due to the sun (a tobacco leaf). yaharokowe.

to have a sunken belly, to be hungry. wãhetewe.

to begin to paint circular designs on someone or something. tipikiprai.

suegro, agarré un caribe y salé (el agua para cocinarlo). shoape, poo ke ya koshi yokerema, ya koshi sayuprarema.

piranha, caribe fish. yokerema.

Woodpecker was without support (at the treetop) and was extending its neck turning its head in all directions. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

extending the neck moving the head. katiapraroma.

at dawn they offered food baskets, they offered baskets full of momo fruits. the pe ni ithãprayou ha henaponi, momo ke a ithãprai ha kuparuheni.

to offer food baskets. henaponi.

there is a turtle (on the ground). hei totori pe praa kur e.

look for a moment. a ta mipraa.

I'm going immediately to inform my brother-in-law and also it can be The word 'praa' in Yanomami means 'to dry (something)'. shoriwe iha ya the ta wãripraatu sho.

to be placed, to be situated. praa.

are you satiated. wa puhi tikrou.

to be satiated, to put on a serious or angry face. tikrou.

to show teeth, to bare teeth, to smile or laugh showing teeth. weehetou.

spider. wariomi.

to make war. niyayou.

to split in two by pulling in opposite directions with the teeth and fingers. wakokoprai.

I have conjunctivitis. ya mamo wayupi.

(they) had conjunctivitis. mamo wayupirariyo.

to have conjunctivitis. wayupi.

the ground broke after sinking gradually (possibly as a result of an earthquake). a pitha re hetiriherihe, a pitha pata re rairaipraruhe ye e.

to break after sinking gradually (possibly as a result of an earthquake). hetiriherihe.

they were abducting his sister and he remained indifferent, in his hammock. pe yai pe shaimaihe tehe a mohoti peritaoma.

we abducted a woman from their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to drag, to abduct a woman by force. shaimai.

later you will realize the consequences of your action. waiha wa no wai shihiroprarowe.

to put oneself in a situation that will have dire consequences. shihiroprarowe.

the inflorescences of the pijiguaos hang in the void. rasha ãthe mi kayahapraw e.

hanging in the void. kayahapraw.

to tell others. wã maihi.

to tell others. maihi.

(habla de río arriba. hurari peni kayurifanari pe yashuprai re kupeherono- yatirawe henaki.

expulsar de ira, desalojar; rechazar al enemigo. kupeherono-.

they went to shoot arrows at the vultures. watupa re ke ki niyãi mi re ukukeiwei.

again I will be the one to shoot arrows at the advancing outsiders. kamiyeni ware ya ki ora niyai koo.

he shot an arrow and it got stuck (in a tree). miha niyãkini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot, to fire an arrow. niyããi.

daughter of mine, bring me my tube so that I can inhale the hallucinogen soon. nakami, purinama usi ta poima, epena ya ta koai haio.

daughter, younger sister, younger female cousin, or any young girl to whom one wants to show affection. nakami.

(he/she/it) runs. rere-i.

to run. correr.

cut the umbilical cord of the baby and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

cut the umbilical cord of the baby and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. hãniprareiwei.

the jaguar howled in pain and rubbed itself against the trees (to remove the tortoise that was biting its throat). ira ke a rããmorayoma, hii ke hiki hami a hãrikiãprarama.

to fry, to roast, to toast. hãrikiãrei.

red (color). wakewake.

the lechosa (fruit) begins to be a little ripe in one place. shamakoro wãisipi a shopo patia.

to be stained in one place; to have burned in one place (fire in a clearing); to occupy a small area. patia.

armpit hair (lit. pei hakamisi koi.

hair. koi.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to line up one next to the other and then stop doing it. rãyoprou.

an old man who was lying in a hammock between two trees was peeling fruits by removing the skin with his teeth. pata totihiwe the re hakokotiowei, mo wayoai re kukeiwei.

to peel a fruit by removing the skin with the teeth. hakokotiowei.

to have a bad appearance; to be dirty with mud or ashes. toteshi.

the hekura started smiling. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

will he start smiling finally. pe kasi watea ke a ta kuhani.

to smile. watekei.

to leave an activity unfinished. kuyeprao.

he immediately made the call to the hekura (and said): "I make my dog come back to life". a tutomou shoaoma: "ipa yaro ya horiprai ta kuparu" (mit.

call made to the hekura at the beginning of a shamanic session; call made to the hekura by a shaman who has just been initiated. tutomou.

speech from upriver. frararami masi.

speech from upriver. frararami.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lagarto was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei.

when Lagarto was moving along the trunk. wãritipeheriiwei.

to lift repeatedly. yepiyepimai.

¿a qué lugar fueron a acampar en la selva. weti hami pei the pe wãyumi ayou kuhe.

camping. fwãyumi.

a small catfish. e bagre pequeño.

catfish. bagre.

to become dense. tupi-.

to tense the string of a bow by twisting it on itself. petiamai.

extinguishing fires away from the central plaza (perfective, plural object). koa wake rãikiãkei.

extinguishing fires away from the central plaza. rãikiãkei.

to move around. cucli-.

to have oneself painted with a transverse line. yãprutamou.

she simply appeared near her mother. pe nii mi thari hami ha e petou perayoma (mit.

she simply appeared. perayoma.

to crush, lacerate, reduce to pieces, crush under weight, let food disintegrate from overcooking. nahihiãmãi.

as Mount Maiyo gradually disappeared under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear completely under water. shototoprou.

as this region is infested with shawara, you have a headache (lit. hei shawarari ke hiki ha wa heki okãã ta kupoka.

region infested by the shawara (lit.: the trees with shawara). shawarari.

you will be drawn down. wamaki ikokorei (mit.

a spirit that pushes a person to the ground and makes them sick with wãrihotho. ikokorei.

they pursued me in vain in this place, they tensed their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

they tensed their bows. iyohooperei.

he picked up the dead dog and lay in ambush waiting for the jaguar. hiima a nomawe ha hokereni, ira a nohi repoma.

to ambush, to lie in wait. repoma.

to smoke (something). weke.

to glue, stick, attach (two objects). sutiprou.

the nearby ones, the close communities. re miowei.

nearby, close by, vicinity. miowei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). hesiyopi.

to have back pain (lit. fpeishoku iwapi.

to break the kidneys with the teeth (animal). fpoushoku wahekiprai.

back. fpeishoku.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to get bruised. hãepotopiprou.

the cave of Yotenama had a strange smell of wild beast. yotenama ke theka ni pata yaithapi ni huthethewe yaiwe.

to have a strange smell of wild beast. yaithapi.

flea, small cockroach species (unidentified). kopathama.

to kick. kaisiai.

to remain behind for a long time. korotao.

Siroromi crushed his entire body, and when he had finished he stuck his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

I am mashing the banana. tate ya hutikai.

to crush, mash, grind with fingers. hutika.

the pot has been placed crookedly (it is tilted or unstable). toutami si kayarea.

to put something crooked, to place something in an unstable position. kayareamai.

I will give it only to him. kama ke iha ya the hipei makokokei.

alone. makokotoo.

this will loosen (= this will come undone). the prohoai.

to let loosen, to let come undone (through negligence). prohopramai.

to loosen, to be loose, to tie loosely. proho.

the one who lived in the shikã (referring to a deceased woman). fa re shikãonowei.

the one who lived in the shikã (referring to a deceased woman). shikãonowei.

there are flashes of lightning. the mi yãmimou.

there were flashes of lightning (perfective). yãmimorãyou.

you sleep while they make love with your wife. mio hearewe wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe.

to make love. mamokasiki.

the avocado tree flowered for the first time. ãhãi ke hi hapamou.

that which occurs for the first time and will continue occurring regularly; a tree that bears fruit for the first time. fhapamou.

character of mythology (lit.: head of picure). thomihewe.

when I'm up there I'll break open the beehive (with machete blows). hami ya tikeo tehe puu ya poprape.

to break into pieces (by striking from above). poprape.

I don. wakokoami.

please, here we have to start being cautious. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to start taking precautions, to become attentive (when one was previously unconcerned). moyawetou.

at the place where the tree is divided into two branches. hi sherereope ha.

the place where the tree is divided into two branches. sherereope.

to leave someone in ignorance, to forget to inform someone. mohotupou.

that is going to fall. a no kerayopi.

it is going to fall. kerayopi.

to call someone by whistling (in the indicated manner); to communicate with someone through the whistled language. heãmorayou.

let's go look for leaves since the rain is late in coming. kei haio no mai ha.

to look for. haio.

to shout while chasing. houhoumo.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to start forming bubbles. poririprou.

to squat and defecate one after the other (humans, animals). thopohopraai.

to start deepening or making something deeper. koeheprai.

the first time I only blew a little hallucinogen into you, this time I made you inhale a lot more by blowing forcefully. hapa kuwetawe ya the thatarema, hei tehe ya the hireketarema.

to blow a large amount of hallucinogens forcefully into someone. ni hireke.

to line up behind. ãyoripraai.

small. katiti.

the dog caused the division of the cattle herd into two unequal groups. hiimani ware ke ki tihetirema.

the dog caused the division of the cattle herd into two unequal groups. tihetirema.

the terrifying noise made by the wind (lit. watori ke pe mamiki no hoã pata re kirihiparurei.

the terrifying noise made by the wind (lit.: made by the feet of the wind). kirihiparurei.

to tremble from illness or cold. naha re siprisimou.

to tremble. naha.

to speak (southern Orinoco dialect). atahu (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to speak (southern Orinoco dialect). atahu.

to be painted red with annatto (a plant used for red dye). frãihou.

the demon (that knocks people down by kicking them) had just finished building a platform around a huge algarrobo tree, when Jaguar arrived. kãrãnãri ãro kohi pata yotoharimai tutoonowei ha, irariwe ke a pata waroo ha heparuni.

that has just been done or made. heparuni.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. poshoshotamakini.

to shell corn. fyono hushishai.

to crumble, to pulverize with the fingers, to crumble inside the hand. fyono.

to change slope/hillside. mohe hoteai.

to vary in intensity (noise). fwã mohe hote.

to oscillate, to sway, to rock. hoteai.

to pry apart, to lift something using a long pointed object as a lever. iyoreai.

the dog was small, not big. wãisipi a wai hiima kuoma, prewe mai.

to diminish, to become smaller, to narrow. wãisipiai.

designates the chácharos during a ceremonial dialogue (lit. fhei ke ki re hirikoyahi.

designates the chácharos (a type of bird) during a ceremonial dialogue (lit.: those that rub themselves with colorant). hirikoyahi.

but they made it grow very tall. kihami re hi tiremapi kuaai re shoakeiwei.

they made it grow very tall. tiremapi.

The ant bites me. Kokoku ẽ wãri.

ant. kokoku.

bed of leaves that has been used for making love. kokopi.

to make a child sick by not respecting sexual prohibitions during breastfeeding. foshe wãriãi.

to make a child sick by not respecting sexual prohibitions during breastfeeding. wãriãi.

to not take revenge, to not fulfill blood revenge. puhi kãi uprao.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to have sleepiness, to feel sleepy. kokãrã.

to make concave (perfective aspect). hopokokei.

I will go to their houses to get powerful hekuras, and I will direct them towards you (making them spin). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

powerful ones. hekuras.

to become smooth. si frakaha.

post that supports the rear part of the roof of a dwelling or shelter. shikrã.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to separate the toes with the hand. kakatai.

to start making something dense or thick. shikoprai.

while we take care of the firewood, they go to look for termite nests (to start the fire). ãrepo pe kãi teapotayouhe: mientras nosotros nos ocupamos de la leña, ellos van a buscar nidos de termitas (para encender el fuego).

termite nest. ãrepo.

they offered him the spleen, and he got angry (for receiving such a bad portion). pei re e wakrepi wãri re hipekeiwehei, a wãri re hushutariyonowei.

it took a long time before Horonami discovered that they were having sex with his wife, and it made him angry. y ã k u m i horonami pe suwepi re e pe na wayou ha tararini, a hushutamaremahe.

to get angry. hushutou.

to let (something) mature/ripen. fetemai.

to let something mature/ripen. fetemai.

del otro lado Tilingo multibandeado agrandó a su vez la cavidad del peñasco. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

enlarged a cavity. piremarithaweni.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). hakoreni.

Murciélago fue a pegarse (a lo largo de un tronco de árbol). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

Murciélago fue a pegarse (a lo largo de un tronco de árbol). sutiketayowei.

to return to the shapono (communal house) one after another. ãmopraai.

(he/she/it) falls. ke-i.

to fall. caer.

extend the head (to look), mount on something to reach an object. hiyãhããi.

it is for fear of the itching that lice produce that they shave their heads. noma pe no shiki kiri ha thaheni pe he mãrokoshipramai.

to produce itching. mãrokoshipramai.

the shaman's spirits associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the enemy shamans, to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

shaman. hãhoriwe.

it is behind. the nohãmiwe.

to be situated behind. nohãmiwe.

to address someone using that term, to be with a female person in a husband-wife relationship. wãhãmamou.

they paint their bodies and put white down on their heads. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to put white down on someone. horoipei.

to have become numerous. prukarariyo.

they killed peccaries and gave the broth of the stew to drink (= they killed peccaries and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

to produce a dry sound by moving the jaws (referring to killing peccaries). hunenemore.

the jaguars were growling threateningly. ware ke ki misisiãmoma.

to growl, to emit a growling sound. misisiãmomai.

I fished at a place where there was a strip of sand parallel to the shore. mrakatahu a werereope ha yuri ya pe kããma.

to be arranged in parallel, a strip of sand arranged parallel to the shore. wererewe.

with her hands she was raising and lowering rhythmically the cotton, it was a new and large ball. shinari re uku pata yokomamoma, tute re the ki pata.

she was raising and lowering rhythmically objects that belonged to the deceased. yokomamoma.

to sweat. si ahi fyopri hai.

to sweat. fyopri.

the daughter of Venado showed her the manaka palms. hayariwe ke theepini manaka siki a himikema.

to show something to someone. himikema.

to sink into the water under the weight of something. kaokoo.

Bejuco colocado en forma circular en torno a una cesta para reforzarla. mothorokohima.

to cover the ground (fruits). poshoshowe.

give him tobacco. pee nahe ta hipeki.

tobacco. pee nahe.

to be lying face down on the floor (in a hammock, on a branch, etc.). yarehoai.

to fill with dust, to let something get covered in dust (through negligence). piãmai.

to give a small amount of something. isipikei.

he lives with the "Whites" and shares their food, surely his tongue has become numb (= he does not know how to assert his rights, he does not know how to express himself). nape a re periope, a ni riape ha, aka wãri moyepiai ke the.

come up, come up, come eat apia fruits with us. tupo, tupo, apia ke ki ta riayo.

to share food with someone, to participate with others in taking hallucinogens. riape.

los jóvenes cavando el suelo (con un cuchillo, con un machete). mapeni yorehi si tuyei ayaoma.

machete. mapeni.

they feared a tobacco theft. pee nahe pe nohi horihipomahe.

to feel apprehension (for another person); to fear a theft. horihipomahe.

to tell someone to keep something (or someone) closed or in a certain position or situation. fraamapou.

to be completely cut into pieces (elongated object entirely cut into slices); to be drawn or painted with many transverse lines. hahetima no.

there is a lot of food in the garden. hikari theka no nihi.

there is a lot of honey. puu pe no nihi.

to produce a large quantity of something. nihio.

the husband lay down without waiting, he then saw the two gallinetas. pe heãropi e ha peritaikuni, hãshimo e kipi tararema.

to lie down without waiting. peritaikuni.

to level, to flatten. resisiprou.

to start shortening. hokataprai.

above all do not think that I call him son-in-law without having that kinship relation with him (= he is truly my son-in-law). horehore e the kaﬁki fekamaa pea ta kurani, a kutihe.

son-in-law. fekamaa.

it was covered in moss, and was as slippery as what covers the body of fish. yuri ke pe mokure kure naha the kapurashipi kuwe.

slippery substance that covers the body of fish. mokure.

to break into little pieces. remakashirayou.

to be aligned (in a natural way). rãyoprawe.

you do not truly know how to express yourself (by participating correctly in exchanges), you do not return the value of the goods you receive (lit. wa aka hayuomi yai, imi no wãi prahaimi yai.

to return the value of goods received (lit.: the goods you give do not go far). prahaimi.

to miss someone for a moment, to feel sad for a moment. iyotou.

to soften something, to make something soft locally. epeheamai.

he unties the canoe. kanawa a ta kusheprari.

he untied the hammock (that he was carrying on his back), and lay down. yii theki a ha kusherini a perioma.

to untie, to unbind, to detach. kusherei.

he/she did not eat. a iyanomi.

he/she did not eat. iyanomi.

(perfective form of wasihi). wasihikei.

bark that previously peeled off easily (perfective aspect of the inchoative). warirayou.

as (the turtle) had its head sunk (in the shell), it observed it and turned it over several times. pei ke pe he wai taroa ha yairini, a mima, pe mi hatuatarama.

to sink deeply. tarorayou.

catch termite soldiers by inserting a stick into their nests, they will eat them. oshe wama akaki ha hishãni pe akaki he oape.

catch the oshe aka termites and offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe.

to capture termite soldiers by inserting a stick into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). hishãni.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to turn over multiple objects, to exchange multiple objects, to exchange wives. hemihiãkei.

I forgave them. ya pe nohi asipema.

I forgave them. asipema.

to have had crosses painted on one. yãhirimorãyou.

to be afraid. hutahutamou.

I'm going to sit on one buttock. ya roa kayarekei.

to be twisted, to be placed in an unstable position. kayarea.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. shinahepe.

it is foggy, it is cloudy. fthe mimou ihirashipi.

to become cloudy, to become foggy. ihirashipiai.

to breastfeed a child. shatimarei.

malaria. paludismo.

when Jaguar's arms were too short to embrace the tree trunk (which was expanding), he went crazy. iwariwe ke a pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma (mit.

to be crazy, to be frightened. horihou.

to put yellow, paint, color yellow (locally). ashiamai.

it is said when several paths lead into the same place. fyo he pe haprawe.

to protrude (end of an object). he haprawe.

to stretch, to extend. yimikaki utu.

the spirit omawe koheriwe took possession of my pei no uhutipi and is chewing (devouring) it. omawe koheriweni ware a no uhutipi ha ipirekirini, ware a no wãi uhuti ta wãshikiãkirire.

a mythical being that possesses a feline head, enormous arms, and is arboreal; it attacks men to devour them. koheriweni.

follow me, you will capture a small váquiro (= you will kill an enemy). ware ke wa ihirupi huweape, a nosi ta yauiku.

to catch, capture, seize, take possession of (a single object). weape.

to be the only one who falls ill. mohothamou.

to be the only one who falls ill. mohotha.

to look at someone with anger, to look at someone askance. poruhutou.

I will not be able to find the path again. ya no wãri katitipropi mai ke.

to find the path again, to find the right direction again. katitiprou.

he follows our trail again. yamareki yo nosi ha katitia koreherini.

he follows our trail. koreherini.

to fall. kei.

to run. rerei.

indicates repeated action. mai.

to wait for edible caterpillars to fatten before collecting them. ãyoparami.

do not let yourself be heard by the women (lit. suwe pe iha a wã hirimotihe.

do not let yourself be heard. hirimotihe.

(Leptodactylus bolivianus frog). pukumari shi.

Leptodactylus bolivianus (a type of frog). pukumari.

tree (taxonomic classification). horãhorã.

we must light a fire and spread the embers (to burn the land for planting). wa wake ha yerini, wa the ha yãrãreãrini (mit.

to spread, to scatter. yãrãreãi.

we went down to the River of Rains and went back upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

upstream. paruhuru.

to carry a single object from a canoe or water to land. washiriamai.

he said in turn: "I broke my nose. e kuu mi hetuoma (mit. ". ).

on the other side Tilingo multibandeado enlarged the cavity of the rock in turn. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma (mit.

to do in turn, to do one after the other. hetuoma.

pedir ser invitado. wã no ohiãmou.

to ask to be invited to a friendly community when one has nothing left to eat in their conuco. ohiãm.

to paint round spots on the body by rolling a ball of onoto (red dye) mixed with saliva on the skin. hikikiãi.

to act interestingly to attract the opposite sex. mokomou.

they descended to the river to shoot their arrows at the fish. parawa u ha yuri pe niyai mi re ithopariyowei.

to descend, to get off (a canoe). ithopariyo.

to be hungry. hãshãmi.

to consume a large amount of banana puree. kuratha u preai.

to consume a lot of. u preai.

to turn one's head, to face. mi yaitou.

to turn one. yaitou.

to crumple or dent it in several places. wãikipram ai.

to crumple or dent something in several places. wãikipram.

it is fluid. the hereshi.

it is light blue. the ushi hereshi.

fluid, liquefied. hereshii.

fine. finas.

you will weave an open-weave basket or mapire and we will paint ourselves (imprinting the hexagonal pattern of the mapire on the skin). yoroﬁ ke wa tiyepe, pefeki onimope.

to paint oneself, to be painted. onimope.

squirrel cuckoo (bird species). shikoyãmi.

where a dry stream flows into the river, we set up camp. hei u re hãshio no no pape ha, yo re ithot a i.

dry. hãshio.

if you are always disputing with them, the Yanomami will take your footprint to do sorcery on you. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi wa the pe hore peyeprai si perihi ihehea ha.

to dispute with someone, to scold, to get angry with someone. peyeprayou.

to roll over itself (an object). yapuru.

slightly curved (perfective aspect of the inchoative). wãheterayou.

the man went in company with the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). eri ke ki nini thapore tao, wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

to mix, to intermingle, to blend. nikereai.

bring us cassava flour here. mayoko hiki ta perapayo.

cassava flour. mayoko hki.

Belongs to the taxonomic category of animals and plants. sherekana3.

he/she smiles. kasi wateai.

to smile. watea-.

they have stolen my knife. siparaye si a thomiremahe.

my knife. siparaye.

fruits. rtivamenfrutos.

he put it quickly on his shoulder. pei ke hako ha the ruketarema.

since my shoulder did not hurt, I took advantage to bring all the necessary rods (for construction). ya hako niniprou mai ha ya the hiki ma re oa waikimarihe.

shoulder. hakro.

he went around the camp examining it (then he said to himself): "but where could they have gone. yãno ke pe miã tiporea ha hititiapotuni: "weti hami wa the pe kurayoma ta thawe. ". ".

to go around in a circular form, to go around. tiporei.

I am the only one who wants to work. kamiye ya shiro ohote makokoa.

at this moment he is alone. a kua makokotoo.

to be the only one, to act on one. makokoa.

to break a banana or plantain stem with a rigid pointed object (bow or stick) in order to collect the bunch it bears. tihekikei.

he turned his head abruptly towards his daughter. pe thee ke iha a mi yapaprakekirioma.

to turn one. yapaprakei.

ya pucia de una formas derivadas, modales u otras, caracterizadas por un mismo condicionamiento fonológico. the koo waikiokema ke tao.

Jaguar tasted (cautiously) with the tip of the tongue. ira ihete pe re aka mi wai hore ha tetoni.

to taste with the tip of the tongue. tetoni.

she formed the wad without having properly passed the tobacco through the ashes (lit. riye totihiwe e nahe wãri humiprarema.

not fully cooked; to be green in a place. riyea.

I raise the hammock, which is too low. yii ke ki yahatotowe ha ya ki isiamai.

let the tobacco grow well, above all do not dry it when it is still too small. pee wa naheki isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai.

to leave something to grow tall, to let something grow tall. isiamai.

is it good like that. ihi taani.

is it good like that. ihi taani.

transgressing the prohibition of having sexual relations during breastfeeding. hayapisipramarei.

he who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and without waiting deflowered her. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei (mit.

to have the leg swelling. fmatha shekekeai, inc.

leg, hind leg. waiweini.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their instruments, their instruments did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slip without penetrating (a blade in poor condition). pãheheãi.

I would have liked to visit them, but the gossip dissuaded me (lit. e ki ha ya humapi rea re kure (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : the gossip made me turn my back). ).

gossip, rumor. ãwãã.

to start putting a handle on something, using a split stick and binding to attach it; to start wedging something into a fork. haoprai.

also the women scratch themselves with a sharp stick during the ritual of their first menstruation. suwe pe yipimou tehe pe kãi hãsikou.

to scratch repeatedly, to not stop scratching during a ritual. hãsikou.

just when I was fleeing, my bow got caught in the vegetation, and I pulled it several times to free it. ya tokuu tehe hãto nahi rukekema, hãto re ya nahi ikokama.

I pulled several times. ikokama.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

to stagger, to totter. atateai.

dust. hekrãhekrã.

let's run away, older brother. ãiwe, peheki ta rereheri.

let. rereheri.

the plants are already big, the petioles are a little thick. pe henaki pataa waikipariyoma, preãkãwe ke henaki hetho.

medium, a little big. preãkãwe.

there where the ãri ãhi tree rises, I will establish my plantations, in that place I will live. ãri ãhiki re uprayahi, ya ãhiki ka thai ha kuparuni, ya motoreo ta yaio.

to start describing a circle while walking. motoretou.

to have become light red. momihirayou.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, to become bigger than. morokoãi.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, become larger than. morokãi.

to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic). heheteprou.

her pregnancy was very visible, her husband was going to be stunned when he arrived. suwe ke e maka tiyeria ha, pe heãropi ke e ãmoku keprohorope.

to be in an advanced state of pregnancy (humorous). tiyetirami.

to calm down, to desist from going to live elsewhere as announced in a fit of anger. yãnikikei.

to have fallen asleep. maharishirayou.

ceremonial. ceremoniales.

to be afraid. pehihi.

to be a little thin, a little worn out by use or corroded by moisture. repisihi.

Sleep. a ta miiku.

Sleep!. miiku!.

to be bent, twisted (edge of an instrument). tishikiwe.

to open in several parts. wateteai.

to be/exist in a location. kura.

to become vertical, to put vertical. wapoai.

to rot, decompose, become extremely rotten (wood, clothes, etc., except for animal matter). rutha.

it seems that those who went on reconnaissance have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

to discover, to notice something in the forest. aruhei.

the pot is hung crooked. toutami si yauo akarewe.

there is a bee nest (hung), we (you and I) will go burn it. kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

to be hung, to have been hung. yauami.

to fabricate a short bamboo arrowhead, to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (if damaged by impact). theeker.

he made pieces of vine jump with his nails. pei ke imisikini e thoku hematha yutuataramai kupariyoma (mit.

the cat retracts its claws. mishi imisiki kushesheaprarai.

fingernail; toenail of a front paw; flight feather. fimisiki.

the water that has remained in a container for a long time always makes me feel nauseous. hote u peni ya kamishi yoruhou tharei.

to feel nauseous. yorurayou.

to be thin/slender, to be hairless/naked. mãroãi.

to buzz. ururumou.

(name of a tree). yopo.

on the slope of that mountain, where they hang from the trees, I will cut those lianas. fei pariki re uprayaﬁ, fei thoo thoku re tuyahi, ya thoku ta pafetipra.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will say that without a doubt (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

to be located in front of, and at a certain distance (variable), from the place of the utterance. pafetipra.

when they are completely mature. wãkeguaos.

los hekura matarán un jaguar. ama ikoto a prapou yaiopehe (cha.

jaguar. yaiopehe.

(talk of upstream). purima ãhutho.

upstream. ãhutho.

(myth): the arrow canes sprouted in a scattered way and the people of the Scattered Toucans fell in love with them. hi re toarakirihei (mit.

it is planted in a spaced out manner. the tia no shorororegw e.

dispersed, scattered (referring to plants or fruits coming from certain palm trees). shuhuhuru.

they fled to the forest (to take shelter from the disease). urihi hami pe tokurayoma.

the otter escaped immediately. proro ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to flee, escape, run away. toku.

to make frequent mistakes when speaking; to get tongue-tied repeatedly during a ceremonial dialogue. aka hãrohãi.

to make a mistake or get tongue-tied when speaking; to have a slip of the tongue. hãro.

exhausted (something) by giving it away. nohi mraakei.

to exhaust a good by giving it away to others. nohi mra.

the plants are already big, the petioles are a little thick. pe henaki pataa waikipariyoma, preãkãwe ke henaki hetho.

medium, a little big. preãkãwe.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekeprou.

put it up. the ta makeki.

put it up. makeki.

there are animals in the forest (or: animals live in the forest). urihi hami yaro pe huu.

to moisten the fingers with saliva (generally to catch a small object that is stuck) and also it can be The word 'huu' in Yanomami means 'to go'. fimiki kahupitou.

to be, to live, to exist. huu.

the day soon returned to how it was before. the mi uhehetou mi yaparayoma.

1. To begin to, 2. To widen the upper part of a container; to open the edges of a canoe or vessel. uheheãi.

we are shooting arrows at it. kamiye pemakini pema a niyapraai.

we, us (emphatic plural pronoun). pemakini.

come little one (son-in-law), you will lick my fingers (after I have harvested honey). hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape (mit.

Affectionate kinship term used by parents-in-law (male or female) to address their son-in-law. Also used during an initiation or shamanic ceremony.. pusimiwe.

we went around a hill. yamaki re kutapareyoruuwei.

we went around a hill. kutapareyoruuwei.

they messed up your hair when cutting it, they messed it up without you realizing. wa the miki wãriãi totihionomahe, wa miki wãriãnoma.

to mess up, to disarrange (e.g. hair). wãriãi.

in. kuweta.

the upper part of the skull. hemi.

a tree for gathering its fruits. mãhokei.

to receive a portion cut by tearing or separating a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hahathopei.

the children were afraid of him and fled in all directions. i hiru peni a no kiri thaihe ha pe ruapraroma (mit.

to flee in all directions. ruapraroma.

the otter used to take refuge (= disappear) in a small hole. wãisikiripi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuoprou yaioma.

small; scarce; a little. wãisikiripi.

headdress of the hekura that possesses the clarity of the moon. watoshe peripori.

to crush something by hitting it with the palm of the hand, to crush an insect in that way. paikei.

he committed a lapsus and mocked himself a lot. a aka ha hãropraruni, pruka a noka ikãoma.

to laugh mockingly, to mock by laughing. hãropraruni.

(remote past imperfective). pere.

Banana and meat. Wake u heri.

and. u.

I am closing the mapire (tying its edges). yorehi ya si he itutuai.

to keep a basket closed by tying the opposite edges together. itutupou.

Was it when going to what community that someone took my footprint (to perform black magic with it). weti theri pe rii ha ya ta fuprei yare mãyo wãfã terare ma ta sihe ke.

to take the footprint, to take the earth that was stepped on by someone in order to perform sorcery and cause illness and death. terare.

Honey produced by the wakopo na bee. wakopo na: bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). It nests in tree hollows; these bees are so aggressive that the honey is not harvested.. wakopo.

make small fires. kai wãisipi wake wai ta thakihe.

make small fires. thakihe.

the leaves are covered in dew. y ã ã pe hena hemaãhupi.

to be covered in dew. hemaãhupi.

fledgling that loses its down and starts growing its first feathers. makutupi.

fledgling. makutupi.

to have the tongue under the lower lip. kareo.

null. kuukuumi.

go get water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

I scoop it out with a gourd. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

to be able to be extracted or removed using a utensil (gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikeamamou.

to gather or hold the arms against the chest. yokokoo.

to obstruct a place (durative). paimimai.

I pull the banana plant towards me (to knock it down and collect the bunch). kuratha ya siki iyoai.

they chased me in vain in this place, they were tensing their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

to pull towards oneself, to tense a bow. iyorei.

fish, bocón; Brycon spp. (Characidae). pokou.

to divide in two. shekereprai.

to possess objects in different parts. shetekepou.

las cosas dulces me despiertan el deseo. pe hami the pe puhi prukamai.

desear. prukamai.

to have a slightly reddish tone, to have reddish reflections (locally). wahehea.

to be hungry. hayakawe.

to have gotten wet. hererariyo.

put it up. the ta makeki.

put it up. makeki.

in a place where water was heard flowing underneath him, from his feet, he pierced the earth with his bow. e naha motu re u pata shararamou re pepianowei ha, hãto nahini u hiwehama.

to be below, to be underneath. pepianowei.

to receive little, to disappoint someone. waipei.

to be deformed, twisted, hardened like leather (perfective, plural subject). prithothorariyo.

I shoot at a beast. yaro ya homopramai.

I will shoot you with the thing of the "Whites" (a gun), I will kill you. nape ke pe matoﬁpini, pe ha homopramarini, pe prapouwe.

to make explode, to shoot a gun. homopramai.

where he/she/it was. edonde.

as he was waiting for them, he called them by whistling. pe no ha taikuni, pe husi heãmorayoma.

called them by whistling. heãmorayoma.

they heard the cries of the child. ihiru a miã wã hiriremahe.

they heard the cries of the child. hiriremahe.

to be afraid. pisimi.

to become affected by a supernatural malefic disease associated with the vampire and attributed to leishmaniasis. washeãi.

The hekura have renounced living in my body, they have abandoned me. ware tiraatarai waikiomahe, tira no ke ya.

to abandon a task that cannot be completed well. tiramai.

I paint myself on the face. mi hiporoshio.

to paint oneself on the face. hiporoshi.

to help (him/her). tharipiki (pei).

to help. tharipiki.

niece, I'm going to break the dry branches (hitting them against the ground) to warm myself. shete, pokopokoye ke ya wãri yahekiai.

dead wood, dry branch. pokopokoye.

as this region is infested with shawara, you have a headache (lit. hei shawarari ke hiki ha wa heki okãã ta kupoka.

to have a headache (lit. to have a band of bark or vines around your head). kupoka.

¿hay sobrevivientes. wa the pe shee peria ta yaira ke.

survivors. sobrevivientes.

knot. kore.

They looked for them, but since there were no footprints, they stopped. the pe taeo ma kui, the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

to have a footprint (the ground). yãshiki.

I have intestinal worms. ya shiprupi.

small intestinal worms (unidentified (animal, plant)). shipru.

he/she eats and also it can be The word 'iya' in Yanomami means 'to see'. t iyai.

eat, feed, nourish. iya.

to drag an object through mud or some other more or less liquid material (so that it gets coated with it). tihirumai.

to decline, move away slightly from the zenith (a celestial body). yoteherayou.

to be too high (wall of an object), to become concave on the outside. wapokoray.

Baba could not contain (the laughter) any longer, he spat out the beautiful fire. iwariwe ke a puhi reprou ha maparuni, kai ke wake pata riyehewe hoprarema.

to vomit, to spit out, to regurgitate. maparuni.

lagoon that is. thookoroai.

that which can be. hãhimamou.

they burn one after another. pe ishioprou.

to burn one after another, to burn at the same time. ishioprou.

the softening or unrolling of new leaves or cotton balls. reblandecimienãkro.

to chat, converse, exchange news in the course of a ceremonial dialogue. ãikãyou.

the two went out. ke kipi harayo ma.

I launched an attack (against the enemies). ya pe wãri re shurukuruhe ye.

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs. -rayo.

to be hungry. mamohe.

to form folds. wãuku.

I do not understand what you are saying. ya kua waikia, a wã hoyãowe kutihe.

to understand (what is said, a foreign language). hoyãowe.

they return on their steps. yapahou.

to sneeze. erekou.

to start gathering its fruits. mãhoprai.

deep water. uoki.

my older brother launched the bow. ãiweni hãto nahi niyarema.

to launch, to propel, to project. niyarema.

that shaman shamathari really has the power to initiate, it is he who has transformed me into a shaman, he has made me a shaman. shamathari the hekurani, pei a norãmi yai hekuraprai ha totihioni, ihini pei ke ware shi yai wãriã totihimarei kurei (cha.

to become a shaman, to be initiated as a shaman. hekuraprou.

there are trees in the forest. urihi hami hii pe upraprawe.

trees. upraprawe.

al venir aquí hice un rodeo para evitar a la gente Arimawe. ãrimawe theri ke iha ya e ma re ãyoikiyohe.

to make a detour to avoid something. ãyoikiyohe.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

he fell under the weight of the load, and remained crushed under it for a long time. a ha sheikuni a hikitao heatima (mit.

to keep an object in place by pressing it with the hand or putting a weight on top of it. hikikiyo.

white, crystalline, more or less translucent stone. kakuruma.

to clean the soles of the feet by rubbing them against something; to scratch the feet by rubbing them against something; to scratch the cavity between the toes by passing an object through it. kakeku.

it returned quickly to place an ant nest (of the konakona species) on the ground. konakona pe pesi praa shoakeyoruma.

to place on the ground, to put down. praakei.

I was afraid and startled: it was completely clean, brother-in-law. the auprariyoma: se pumaki yasuai totihikeyoruu, shori.

completely clean. totihikeyoruu.

then I show them to him. pei ya the he tharea ha pemaparini.

to show (something) to someone under the effects of a hallucinogen. pemaparini.

the shamans go to kill (in another community). hekura pe imimou.

to take possession of something without being seen. imimou.

bed of leaves that has been used for making love. nohori.

I have itching on the lip. ya kasiki shihitikema.

I have itching on the lip. shihitikema.

Have you killed one of my male relatives, have you made him disappear. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

to shake lightly and laterally a bamboo arrowhead to remove it from the arrow shaft into which it is inserted. hãweteãi.

to paint or draw a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch transversely once. tiprutukei.

dirt, garbage. shamishami.

to scratch oneself once. iprushiprou.

to be very thin. hekrãhekrã.

magic plant cultivated; Xanthosoma violaceum (Araceae). koyeceum.

we eat the honey and then we go on our way. puu yama upe ha koararini yamaki kurayoheriiwei.

we go on our way. kurayoheriiwei.

the weather is rainy. the maapi.

rainy. maapi.

to rub something with the fingertips to remove adhered material (wet sand, dirt, mud, etc.). horokoãi.

to tremble, to shiver. rutarutamou.

I turned my torso to the side and, bending down, tensed my bow. hãto re ya nahi ikokai tutakaoma.

to avoid a projectile. tutakaroyou.

the tree peels well. the si wario.

to peel. wario.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

la nutria alzaba nuevamente la cabeza por encima del agua al acercarse a nosotros. proro oraki yareheatarou kooimai.

neck, head. oraki*.

I have cut a piece of lechosa. shamakoro ya hakarokema.

to cut a piece of something. hakarokema.

he went back at dawn. the mi ha haruruni the wãri koã henarayoherima.

at dawn, early morning. haruruni.

to remain for a long time in the last position (while walking in a group through the forest). shiokatao.

it was because the woman was a scatterbrain that Teremi eviscerated her. suwe ke the mohoti kuteani teremini the re kakaprareiwei (mit.

suddenly when she untied them. kutaeni.

having many clusters on the lower part. ikrekea.

to bend, to curl up. ãkrotou.

cool, fresh. ruwemou.

some reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

to reach the high part of a riverbank (the water of a flood), to approach the shore, to navigate a canoe close to the riverbank. ihetetekei.

to open a path by cutting vegetation with a cutting instrument (applying downward or oblique blows). fyo pahetimai.

they cut off the jaguar's head. ira ke he pahetiprai ha kuparuni (mit.

to cut vegetation by striking downwards or obliquely with a cutting instrument. pahatho.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kurorei.

new sprout (shoot, sprout, stem); new feather of a growing bird. shiputukupi.

to cause to have sores or rashes. sipiamai.

to hang hammocks outdoors. hakokopram.

those who made the cotton balls carried several with them, and accompanied (the visitors). shinari uko re thaiwehei the pe ha yehiarariheni pe nokaope.

they accompanied. yehiarariheni.

los Monos capuchinos manoseaban el cuerpo de la mujer. hoashiri peni suwe ke a hupepraramahe (mit.

manoseaban (they were groping). hupepraramahe.

to be locally rigid. kasheshea.

accumulated. tikarayou.

to recover consciousness after having been under the influence of a very strong hallucinogen; to free oneself after having been possessed by a supernatural being; to become human. yãnomãmiprou.

to scratch with the nails, generally to remove the red spots caused by the bites of gnats. tisikikei.

a type of bird, the great antshrike (Taraba major). batara.

he quickly untied the firewood and lit the leaves. kai ke wake ha kushetarini henaki wake piyemak e m a.

to untie quickly. kushetai.

the cannibal people of the shãki nari live downstream. shãki nari a naikiri bo mi hetua kurakiri.

black bee (unidentified). shãki.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to carry something above one. mojen.

to fall. kei.

to run. rerei.

indicates repeated action. mai.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club on him. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to make something or someone fall by pushing them down an inclined plane. nihorãmãi.

you name, you pronounce the name, do not lie, do not lie. horemotihe.

you name, you pronounce the name, do not lie, do not lie. horemotihe.

to become shallow, to decrease in depth. resiai.

but they made it grow very tall. kihami re hi tiremapi kuaai re shoakeiwei.

they made it grow very tall. tiremapi.

the dog was named Tokorinawe, it was very big. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

name of a dog. Tokorinawe.

to go hunting. apotayo.

provoked the response of the jaguar. ira a wã humarema (mit.

provoked the response of the jaguar. wã hum a r e i.

to give a crab to a man to bite into while following the unokaimou ritual. washishiprai: darle un cangrejo para mordisquear a un hombre que está siguiendo el ritual unokaimou.

to crush or bite into something completely with the incisors. washishiprou.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, become larger than. moroko.

to let something take a curved shape, to let something become curved. parokoamai.

to become clean, to become unoccupied (ground). noshi tãihãi.

are the neighboring people/persons/relatives the ones who killed my relative. yaﬁtherimi the kini ipa thora a teai pea ma ta kurahewe.

people/persons/relatives. yaﬁtherimi.

they do not eat that (the speaker has just verified it). pe the pe waimi sihei.

the bats ate all the cambures during the night. hewe peni raparimi ki mi wathea harurema sihei.

to infer, to deduce from visible consequences. sihei.

to expel a liquid by twisting or squeezing. wehetiprou.

fat, large (living being). huteheprou.

the wood is already hollowed out (by insects). hi si hororoprou waikirayoma.

to become hollow, to become full of holes. hororo.

short. horotowe.

I came down several times from the hammock to stoke the fire. ya ha ithotoni, koa ya wake pe yetaai kuperei.

to descend, to come down. ithotoni.

1. To put to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. 2. To tell someone to dry, to start smoking.. tetekamai.

the warriors imitate the jaguar, they yell. wayu peni ira pe owemaihe, pe nosiyeãmou.

they imitate the jaguar, they yell. owemaihe.

to trace several lines across multiple objects. yãprutararei.

a type of small bird, possibly a woodpecker or tinamou. yoparawe.

to move, to displace imitating someone. oweatarai.

Foo looked exactly like his own father. pe foo the kuope naha foo a kuoma.

when the adults were absent, Jaguar killed the children (to eat them). pe hɞɞ re the pe no kupramou tehe, irani ihiru re pe shei heama.

father, older male relative in direct line; adult (as opposed to child). foo.

the hummingbirds pierced the top of the ancestors' skulls and sucked out their brains. poreri ke the he mono ha, teshori peni he tiwehepema, he yoshi pe ukukai shoaoma.

he pricked the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

to give an injection. tiwehei (neol.

to reach or hit someone in the eye or head while doing something. tiweherei.

to be fat, big (living being). hutehai.

Horemariwe's penis penetrated under the ground and then went through the tender casupo leaves (on which the woman was sitting). horemariwe moroshi si re pokeiwei, mokoroma re hena tuku ha "toso.

a mythological figure or character. horemariwe.

palm species (unidentified plant). konopo si: 1.

palm species. konopo si.

she was going from one place to another and her laughter was always heard moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

stay still (or else, you'll see what happens) [antiphrase]. pe he ta reshipro.

to go from one place to another, not to stay still. reshipro.

he killed a tapir, cut it into pieces and they carried it. shama a fa niyapraruruni, a fa pasherarini a yeﬁmahe.

to put oneself to do something. eprai.

nuevamente, empuñó sus flechas. shereka ke ki hurihia re koreiwei.

empuñó. hurihirei.

branches emerging (plural objects, dispersed). shorokoprawe.

give that to the one who is lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

plural persons, disposed. shikãpramou.

he put a bunch of pijiguao fruits on his back (to carry it). rasha e ki yehirema.

her husband had tied together two bunches of pijiguao fruits and carried them on his back. pe heãropi e naha rasha ke ki pata ha parekereni, a yehipoma.

to carry on the back. yehirema.

I have my mouth in a lamentable state (= I am thirsty). ya kahiki no hore preaai ayaa re totihirayoi.

to lose dignity, to be dishonored, to be in a lamentable state. preaai.

he cut the baby's umbilical cord and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

when dawn broke, he quickly withdrew his penis (from the woman he was making love to). the uheheprou tehe the moroshi uketareiwei.

immediately, instantly, without delay. shoatareiwe.

to paint round spots on someone or something by applying a ball of coloring moistened with saliva. hikikãmai.

no ceses de visitarme. ware he warou mraotihe.

to visit. mraotihe.

woodpecker, yellow-crested woodpecker (Picidae family). epephilus melanoleucos (Picidae).

woodpecker. epephilus.

became round, spherical (perfective). komorekei, perf.

became round, spherical. komorekei.

draw a thick line on the chin and around the mouth. kahiki warukuo.

draw a thick line. waruku.

hair condition that makes it rough and granular. hoso.

to have split longitudinally, to have cracked lengthwise (a long object). ikrãkãrãyou.

he sent Arrendajo (to harvest fruits). ãyãkorãriwe a shimirema.

to send someone to do something; to send something to someone. shimãi.

they penetrated the conuco (they crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hayuoma.

to pass in front of someone. hayuo.

to take on a slightly thick/pasty consistency (like yogurt), either by thickening from a more fluid state or by becoming more fluid from a thicker state. thepehe.

to do it for oneself (to break in that way). wahathorei.

to stretch, to extend. ikoko.

to make a concave mark inadvertently. wãhihipramai.

their bows. erekeprawe.

to be slightly tense, to be horizontal, to be extended horizontally. rerehe.

to become perforated, to crack in several parts (terminative). waresheprou.

to have a foreign body lodged between the eye and the eyelid. mamo ripupiprou.

to have a foreign body lodged between the eye and the eyelid. ripupiprou.

to call someone father-in-law, to be in the relationship of son-in-law to father-in-law. shoapemou.

the tree is getting caught on another one. hi mi thorukuai.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or due to a heavy load being carried). fhuu mi thor u k u w e.

to bend, to curve, to fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; to get caught on another tree when falling. thorukuai.

the Yanomami mix malefic substances with the soil of footprints and are always pronouncing people's names. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi, wa the pe hore peyeprai si ihehea ha.

to mix a malefic substance with the soil of a footprint to make the owner sick or kill them; to cast a magic substance towards someone. rarapraihe.

1. To quickly enlarge the surface area of a burn in a garden by spreading the embers and ashes well. 2. To quickly recover an object (in the manner indicated previously). haprarãretai.

I'm going to break firewood by kicking it. koã ya ãsho kahekirarei.

to break multiple long rigid objects by kicking them. kahekirarei.

it seems that they crossed (the river) at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami e pe ãhã pekatuatayoma.

the others have already crossed. yetu ai the pe pekatua waikiokei.

to cross a body of water, to cross a river. pekatuai.

paipaimou: the way the male paují bird cries. paipaimou: pakataorewe forma de gritar del paují macho.

to cry like a male paují bird. paipaimou.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. siki koraramo.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. koraramo.

now it is really close, they responded, then their voices were heard close by. yamaki komii kooma, pe the ca; hei tehe the yai ahetewe: ahora está verdadekomii ahetetariyo kurei.

really close. verdadekomii.

(it) became hardened and dried by the heat. the hupamou ro.

to become rough, dry, rigid. ro-.

to be happy. yapayapa.

they must sing together, they must sing. pe ta amoamo, pe ta heri.

sing together. amoamo.

cause that he fell ill far from his home (due to my manipulations). wãrihoto.

he obstructed the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

I cover the opening of the cachicamo's den. opo ya ka he kahuai.

to close, to obstruct an opening. kahuakei.

to make (someone) splash once. fhamishiamai.

to become round, spherical. komoreãi, inc.

to become round, spherical. komoreãi.

the tobacco pouch is hung on the stone axe handle. p ee nahe rukea kure.

to be hung, hooked. rukeai.

that is downstream. koro ha the kuakirioa.

that is downstream. kuakirioa.

he maintains his wife in the lower part of the roof (of the home where he lives). pe suwepi a shikãmapou.

to care for, maintain, shelter a person in the lower part of the roof. shikãmapou.

call your mother and let's hurry back home and also it can be The word 'ka' in Yanomami means '(grammatical particle)'. ka, pemaki koo ta haio.

call. ka.

I will not allow them to take shoots from my banana plants. ya the siki kararu tikaremai mai ke the.

to tell someone to separate a banana shoot from the mother plant, or to let someone do it. tikaremai.

they killed one of my parents (lit. yare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to smile, to laugh. wate.

mother-in-law, isn't the wapu good to eat. yapemi, wapu ke ki mihitaimi thawe. It has been soaking for a long time. the no nohi teteapiyei.

mother-in-law. yapemi.

he was not sitting. a roonomi.

he was not sitting. roonomi.

to repair a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakakei.

each will spread them out again. pe the patherio koope ke.

spread out. patherio.

throw away the empty chinchorros (of the hekura that have left), inhale hallucinogens, let the shamans trace a new path (for the hekura) and you will become heavy again (= the hekura will return to lodge in your body). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

to become heavy; to regain the hekura spirits and thus gain weight and power (a shaman). huteai.

to make something cylindrical or approximately round spin or rotate many times. hãmorirei.

the cut of the tree is deep. hi ka mi shoekewe.

to cut deeply (a tree). shoekeprai.

come to pour it here. eyeha the ta ripraayohe.

come to pour it here. ripraayohe.

to come off as a result of a blow (a fragment). yayetiprou.

displace yourselves in a line (and silently), like the chachacos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to line up, to be aligned. shaninio.

¿por qué motivo se disputan. weti wama the ãhã thai kupiyei.

to dispute. kupiyei.

to be slightly wet on the surface. urerehe.

mountain people. ora*.

as I am generous by nature, I offered a large basket of tobacco. ya shi ihitao ha totihioni pee ke ya nahe thari pata hipek e m a.

to be generous. shi ihite.

the yakoana drug will make you senile. yakoana ke a wãrini wa moyepimarei.

hallucinogenic drug. akoana.

he lay down in the hammock painted with transverse lines. thoo ke thoku tiprutawe ha a perikema.

painted with transverse lines. tiprutawe.

the hekura started to smile. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma o a kasi watetou yakea ayakema.

to laugh, to smile. ikã.

vertebra. humotho.

movement. manashi.

when he reached the middle part of his ascent, they (the two) made the tree dilate. pe poushokutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

in the middle, in the central part (of a long object). fpoushoku hami.

middle, center. poushokup.

to feel pain when urinating, said to be caused by eating pijiguaos (fruits) that have been pecked by the blue-headed parrot. niaasi ãrimapi.

blue-headed parrot. ãrimapi.

my fireplace is next to an exit. ipa yãno nanokaa.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. nanokao.

vegetation invading a path (durative). wãkerou.

he opened a path pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

two guayucos have been placed one next to the other. porakapi wayuko ke kipi herurua.

the knife does not cut. sipara si a namo tãihiwe.

to reject someone with the hand; to push aside something obstructing the path; to be stacked on top of each other; to stumble; to be expelled. yutu.

supernatural being associated with bamboo arrowheads, lodges in the chest of brave men. rahakami.

1. To make the fur of a dog glossy (by feeding it well). 2. Factitive of tãihiãi (to smooth, to polish).. tãihiãmai.

to swell (belly); to reach the last stage of growth (banana). yaheheai.

to become flat, horizontal (the end of an elongated object, especially a stick or piece of wood). tatahaai.

(antonym). tureke.

the Spirits-toucans (hekura), with the beak smeared with a white resin from which hung red cotton, approached me hesitatingly, and I was deceived (I thought they were coming to join me, but they did not). mayepi pe kahiki no warapapi hami matoya ke ki iye hore wekekaimai ha ya hore mirama ma kui.

red cotton. toya.

to be pot-bellied (insulting in the presence of the person). shipretewe.

to untie, unbind (multiple objects). kusherarei.

to be about to have oneself painted with transverse lines by someone else. yãprutapramou.

he fell and cried out in pain. a ha kerini, a rããmorayoma.

fell. kerini.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

to shoot a small wooden arrow with a fire-hardened tip (usually done by children or to kill small fish). tiheherei.

muzzle, snout of certain mammals (tapir, danta, etc.). hiyokasi.

mashed cambures (fruits) that have been pounded and kneaded. tiproka no.

lagoon that has been reduced due to persistent drought. thookorowe.

los de Yeprope theri me han golpeado con el lado plano de sus machetes, realmente me hicieron tambalear. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

tambalear, titubear. yoapramai.

to have the forehead painted with a curved line that goes from one ear to the other. tiwarowe.

hurry up to grow, don't stay at home. a ta yawea ta hairi, yahi ha kuo mai ke the.

grow. yawea.

null. toreremi.

(see related forms). shokatama.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain-spirit shakes the ends of the roof poles of the house. ei maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

keep your bow armed. nahi ta iyopou.

my son-in-law. fipa nahi.

certain objects derived from trees (the bow, posts and poles used to build the house, the house itself or a camp in the forest). maariweni.

spider weaver (numerous species). haharamaema.

Bejuco colocado en forma circular en torno a una cesta para reforzarla. mothorokohi.

to have forcibly inserted an object into too narrow an opening (and gotten it stuck). hokomakei.

eres tú quien los ha forzado a caminar ligero, es por tu causa que ellos andan tan rápidamente. kaheni ke wa pe wãri hore ha hushushuponi, wa pe kãi wãri hore ropaai ma re kui.

obligar a caminar rápido. hushushupou.

to kill, to cause death; to kill an animal by clubbing it. chape.

the tapirs are at rest (one after another). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were many rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hoththoã.

bring us cassava flour here. mayoko hiki ta perapayo.

cassava flour. mayoko hki.

to grow (human). tireheprou.

to be generous. noshi ihita.

to bend, to twist, to deform. kohehe.

call, summon. naka.

to salt. mositiprai.

to cause dizziness (perfective form of the causative). kirihimararei.

you (young people), go hunt animals by chance. posheye fortuike a ta niyaprahe.

by chance. fortuike.

to divide into two groups. sherererayou.

when you return home you will have hunger again. wamaki wãri ohei kookiriowei ke the.

to have hunger again. kookiriowei.

the ancestors (who were to become animals) painted their bodies with blood. yarori ke peni pei ke iye pe wãri hami pe yãmoma.

the people of the beasts, the animals (that had human form in primordial times). yarori.

to become infested by worms. oshapiai.

the ground broke after having sunk gradually (possibly as a result of an earthquake). a pitha re hetiriherihe, a pitha pata re rairaipraruhe ye e.

to sink gradually (due to successive and progressive movements). rairaipraruhe.

things that are firmly tied or fixed. rohothoprawe.

amontonen las hojas, ¡nosotros las esparciremos de nuevo. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to spread, extend. patheri.

we want (both) them to pass us, that's why. yahe pe niya re hayuamakiriowei, yaheki uprapekirio.

we want them to pass us. hayuamakiriowei.

he took banana shoots in different places. kuratha siki a yua re piyekeapotayouwei.

in different places. piyekeapotayouwei.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. katikikema.

they said that, then I became the target of their shots. pe pe wãri kuu ha ya niyaprariyoma.

to become the target of one or several shots. niyaprariyoma.

to offer food (to many people in succession). pemokei.

your husband just passed in front of here. paheãrohe ke a hayupariyo kuroi.

to pass in front of. hayupariyo.

vomit your vomits. kano nahipe ta hoyao.

to vomit. hoyao.

I detach several strips of bark from the yãri natha shrub. yãri ya natha ikekai.

to lift, remove (to see, to grab): to detach a strip of bark by lifting it with the fingers, to open a door slightly to look, to partially lift or uncover an object (to see what it covers), to remove a hand of cambures from the bunch by exerting pressure from top to bottom. ikekerayou.

they two isolated themselves from the others and painted their bodies. yãmi ke the kipi yãmou yawerea ha totiikuni.

to isolate oneself, to do something alone. totiikuni.

to put the chest to be hit by an adversary. totopariyo.

to separate from a woman. ãmo*.

but where has the centipede passed. weti hami kumãrãwe wa the ki ta kuroha ke.

denotes perplexity within a question. kuroha.

we moved around during the night. titi ha re pemaki huatarou haruu.

to go from one place to another, to move around. huatarou.

despite my pain, I shot an arrow at the gallineta. ketarini hãshimo ya niyaprarema.

I shot it with an arrow despite my pain. ketarini.

there are many trails that do not lead anywhere. the pe mayo he pruka tatoa kurai.

trail, path. tatoa.

to become scarce, to become depleted. esheshããi.

supernatural being (lit. fomawe ihirupi.

supernatural being (lit.: the son of Õmawe). fomawe.

you will come when I am alone. ya yãmio tehe wa hupe.

to come. yãmio.

to fail to climb a tree. yohehai.

movement of the tail of several fish that swim. yarayaramou.

to arrive near the shore (perfective). katikei.

protruding navel (offensive). fyimotha poyoyowe.

to protrude, to overhang, to jut out. oyoyowe.

shoporopi. shoporãmãpi.

Translation:. kaihiti natohi.

divididive montañero; Cassia multijuga (Leg., Caesalpiniaceae). natohi.

to keep the memory of. ihipipou.

scrotum. aru siki.

go to hunt paujíes (each one on their own side). paruri ke a ta niyaapotuhe.

go to hunt (each one on their own side). niyaapotuhe.

the elders always walked behind. pata re pe shiro nohãoma.

to follow, walk behind. nohãoma.

they removed the perforated body of the man (= they removed from the belly of the monster rahara the body of the man pierced with spears). yãnomãmi ke the tirosha no ukeremahe.

to pierce, perforate (once). tiroshoai.

(in a ceremonial dialogue) to pour the crushed bones of a deceased male into gourds. ipa wa ãhuku he okãã totihitapema.

to pour the crushed bones of a deceased male into gourds. totihitapema.

to sneeze. erekerayou.

he did not go to get his arrow, he ran away immediately in fear. shereka a koãi mai e kiriri yea ha shoariherini (mit.

ran away in fear. shoariherini.

it is rough. the hupamou namo.

the hallucinogenic ayukuma has been finely ground. ayukuma a hupamou si uhutitiwe.

quality that a surface offers to the touch. hupamou.

to be a supernatural being associated with a white, crystalline, more or less translucent stone, who takes possession of the pei mi ãmo (soul) of human beings. kakurumathawe.

they asked Scorpion: "You point at him. suhirina a nakamahe: "kaheni the ta niyapraayo. ". ".

they asked/requested (him/her). nakamahe.

he told his two sons to get into the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemaparema.

to tell someone to get into a canoe. tikemaparei.

to become small (referring to a cotton ball whose thread has been partially used). ãkroprariyo.

to fold the legs of a dead bird by turning them so that the claws hook behind the thighs (in order to carry it on one. yoreke.

to become dense, thick. suta.

to gather the arms over the chest or hold them along the body (when feeling cold); to raise the front legs in a threatening stance (a venomous spider). yokoko.

Apparition felt fear and was startled. pore ke a ha kiriraruni a ãtiprariyoma.

to startle, to be startled. ãtiprou.

rope, bowstring (onomatopoeic). priti.

rope, bowstring. priti.

he hurried to burn the bees with burning leaves, broke the nest, dropped it, and slid down the tree trunk. yetu oi a ha hisikiparuhuruni, a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai kukema.

to drop, let fall. kemarini.

to have a voice that is beginning to change; to become hoarse. wã peherãp r o u.

changing (adolescent); having a hoarse voice (from having shouted too much or after having participated in a ceremonial dialogue). peherãp.

to shorten (make shorter) [plural object]. horotoakei.

you two lie here in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

lying one next to the other in opposite directions (with heads at opposite ends) in a hammock. yotepramou.

to have a beard. fkaweiki weuhuwe.

beard. fkaweiki.

the corn cobs are short. yono mope torohewe.

to be a little long; to have an oblong shape. torohewe.

to make someone/something fall. shikopiprou.

the banana plants did not simply grow little by little, they grew very quickly. kuratha siki no rii teteprou petao mai, siki patai ropaama (mit.

grew. tetetou.

I am worn out from pain. yã mi no hore re wayuhi thawei.

to be battered, to be worn out. wayuhi.

to move the head from side to side (in a sign of negation). yomiko.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. urekemarei.

changed direction (perfective). akehetamarei.

to start to turn an object 180 degrees; to start to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemiprai.

to group together for a moment. hiratou.

to cause to stagger, to cause to stumble from weakness. yotetamai.

it's all stained with dirt, leave it to dry in the sun. the pe pata tepepishi, wa the fueki ha auprarini.

dirty, stained (with dirt, smoke, etc.). tepepishi.

the fire has only caught in certain places. ayakelaje.

to make someone get lost. ohorumai.

to tuck the tail between the legs (of a dog). fshina pareretou.

to tuck the tail between the legs (of a dog). pareretou.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into pieces several times to eat it. makosiamai.

to tear two narrow strips. makosiprai.

to narrow, to cut a narrow strip of something. makosiai.

path that is rapidly invaded by vegetation. wãkeretou.

they killed animals of the hunt. posheye ke a ta niyaprahe.

they killed. posheye.

to place leaves on the roof of a shelter to make it waterproof. fhenaki yoai.

the shelters form a circle. yãno pe tihiyeai.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they lived then downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma (mit.

to describe a circle, to form a circle. tihiyeai.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

to fill a container to the brim. rahoo.

unfortunately, the woman (at the foot of the tree) started to laugh. a ikãwã shoaai ha tikothoni (mit.

unfortunately. tikothoni.

to have the voice that is changing (adolescent). paruripiprou.

the anaconda ate the feline. wãikoya ke kini ira a warema.

anaconda. wãikoya.

he imitates his father (= he behaves like his father). pe hii a owepou.

imitate, act like. pao.

yes. awei.

to take out a gourd container to consume the ashes it contains. fhishima ithomai.

to consume the pulverized bones of a dead person. fhishima thai.

gourd container for storing the ashes of a shaman. amotha.

hide. shãho.

the noise of an outboard motor was heard coming from downstream, going upstream. motoro a wã petarekirio, a wã mi yãmokirioma.

to be heard (noise coming from downstream). petarekirio.

I will mix the two magic substances. heri ya heshihikei.

I will take a kumi vine, I will add the fragrant bark of the balsam of tolu, and I will use that spell to seduce her. kumi ya rii ha heshiprarini, mãrã ya sihi ha heshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

to mix two objects or two different substances. heshihiai.

Jaguar was left behind, and arrived weakened by hunger. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

1. To be left in a weakened state after an illness (a child). 2. To become less rigid, wrinkled by the effect of the sun (a tobacco leaf).. yaharokoai.

term. okoshiprou.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have done anything to you, they would have just shot you with poisoned darts (from a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to repeatedly blow poisonous substances through a blowgun at someone. prothoprothomou.

to place oneself for a while in the center, to go for a while in the middle of the water. ãmotapei.

they (the hekura) could not easily lift the great rock, and it oscillated (in their hands). pei maki hereheprai ha maparuheni, pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma (cha.

light, lightweight. hereh.

he is angry. kashithemi thotho.

to be angry. kashithemi.

I persist, I do not take it into account. ya nape he prakehea ha totihiikuni.

to persist, to insist, to be obstinate. prakehea.

there was one here until a moment ago (the speaker is surprised not to find it). eyeha ai a wã nohi re kuoprei.

mother-in-law, however my brother-in-law ate all the wapu fruits (while you suppose they are not ready yet). yape, shoriweni wapu ke ki nohi waa waikireiwei.

however there were beads (he observes that there are none left). tope pe pe nohi kuoprei.

however, particle denoting surprise, astonishment or disappointment. eyeha.

they separated going backwards. the pe tikukuprou mi ha yaparoni.

he gets angry for no reason. a hushuo si ihehewe.

to do something in reverse, to go back to a previous state. a.

to scratch oneself, to rub against. hãrikio.

it was the spotted-bodied váquiros like the tokori tree leaves that took possession of Sherekanawe. ware ke kini oni tokoripi hena raokowe ke kini sherekanawe a tereherima.

a type of tree with spotted leaves. tokoripi.

I possess a lot of tobacco, but the plants are small. yetu yuri re pe hãupraa totihia ma kure.

a piapoco is crouched near the ground. yahatoto hami ke a roa kure.

low, near the ground. hãupraa.

Rabipelado glanced (towards the scene that was unfolding). nãroriwe the re mitareiwei.

to glance, to take a quick look. mitarei.

to beautify; to make an animal beautiful by feeding it well. riyeheprou.

to disperse to do a sweep or a search. rãkokou.

to be in a certain position. pate.

si (pei). kanapopi.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

to be content. contentarse.

the (cut off) head moved and came to rub against the leg. pei ke heni matha hurii kuaai ha yaioni.

to rub, to touch, to employ a magical substance. hurii.

to form multiple blisters on someone/something. poshorariyo.

to have been folded or rolled up several times (the edge of an object). wapurerei.

they had set out on the path, and it was then that Hoo fell in front of him. the pe ha huoproherini, hoo ke pe keoprou mi paoma.

supernatural being that lurks in the jungle. huoproherini.

they found fallen fruits on the ground. rua ke mo hiraa ha tarariheni.

they found. tarariheni.

it was as if enemy shamans had thrown something, I picked it up, it was a vine. hawe okã peni the sheyekemahe the ha kupraruni, ya the ha hokereni, thoo thotho kuoma.

as if, like. sheyekemahe.

to deform the edge of a tool by hitting it against hard objects. shokekeamai.

the fire descended rolling rapidly along the rock. pei maki pata wake nihorãi ha kuparuni.

to slide down, roll down, descend rapidly. nihorãi.

the pasarela sank under the water when I crossed it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

soak the wapu fruits. wapu ki he ta paoku.

to be submerged, to submerge, to cover with water, to soak. paoai.

1. Fact. of riprai (to spill a liquid by pouring). 2. To spill a liquid by distraction.. ripramai.

this burns my eye. yare mamo fraai.

to cause a strong eye irritation. fraamai.

as the yawari woman confused me, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to change one. aithaai.

to be happy. mamoheremi.

his mother was really anguished. pe nii ke the puhi haruprou yaionowei.

to go crazy, to become anguished. haruprou.

new sprout (shoot, offshoot, stem); new feather of a growing bird. hiputu.

they transformed into supernatural beings in front of themselves by waving burning sticks. paruri pema pe yãikirayou.

to illuminate by waving burning sticks. yãikirayou.

I hit to collect tima honey, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to practice an opening in a hollow object, to open a hollow trunk. pawehamai.

the packages (of fish) had just finished cooking when a heavy rain began to fall. pe pe hãro ripiprou hititio tehe, yetu maa ke pe horã pata re petarurei.

cooked (perfective). ripirayou.

to make smaller, fabricate smaller; to give or take in small quantity. wãisipipraw.

to become solid (for something that is liquid). hihuprai.

while living in company of the yawari I possessed beads. ya rãmi hunomi ya mamiki nikereo tehe tope e pe kuoma.

to mix, blend, combine. ni-.

to twist, bend the tip of an object. toyekeprou.

the cries of Woman-picu. Yãri yaherikeherima (mit.

the cries of Woman-picu. yaherikeherima.

to be decorated with a series of short parallel strokes, like the drawings on the body of a caterpillar kasha husi. oni rohaha foni kasha husiwe.

to decorate with a series of short parallel strokes, like the markings on the body of a caterpillar. husiwe.

1. octopus, 2. to become dusty, to get covered in dust, 3. to fill with dust, to let something get covered in dust (through negligence), 4. dusty. hekãhekã.

the thunder booms in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to be always arguing. ihuma.

he inhaled a pinch of hallucinogen and passed his hands over the strings of the hammock. epena ke a re rishiãpraiwei, pei ke the pe peki hami imiki wai waroroataroma.

to inhale a hallucinogenic substance directly through the nose. rishiãp.

they (the hekura) have seized the evil (in the chest of the sick person). a wayu re huweparihahei (cha.

they (the hekura) have seized the evil (in the chest of the sick person). huweparihahei.

turtle. Wulffia.

large (nauseating) mushrooms sprouted leaning. yore pe pata kaihou shoaoma (mit.

to lean, to incline. kaihai.

to shorten. hokatakei.

to become less rigid, to wrinkle due to the sun (tobacco leaf). yakarokou.

Are you (pl) painted and adorned. wamaki paushimoã haikiprariyo ta kuhawe.

to be painted and adorned. haikiprariyo.

1. To align, 2. To tighten (aligning well) the straw strands of a basket. shanini.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have done anything to you, they would have just shot you with poisoned darts (from a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to repeatedly blow poisonous substances through a blowgun at someone. prothoprothomou.

to turn over repeatedly in a hammock. rakirakimou.

after that you will put other logs on top. ai ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

1. To put on top, to cover, to wrap; 2. Factitive of . heakaamai.

go and kill it (by shooting arrows at it). a ta niyapraharu.

to go and do something. -aharayo-.

the Shapo Woman (supernatural being) came to sit near me farting: "don't dirty my nose", I told her. shapo konayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, shiã keyeheroma: "yare hiyokaki shamiãmai tikootihe", ya kutariyoma (cha.

to make dirty, to stain. shamimai.

Rabipelado took flight and went away. nãroriwe a yerayoherima (mit.

to go flying, to take flight. yerayou.

as the night was getting dark, he approached the woman. the mi ka ha komãtaaruni suwe ke iha a ikuoma.

woman. ikuoma.

we are now approaching the last part of the journey. p emaki peishokuai waikia ke a kure.

approach, get closer to the end. poushoku.

I am the one who has deflowered her. kamiyeni ya ka hiweherema.

I have deflowered her. hiweherema.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell gravely ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall gravely ill repeatedly. parohotou.

don't lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

father. fape.

grain, seed of a vine. pokora mo.

seed, grain of a vine. pokora.

to become partially visible (after having been hidden behind something). waehai.

to be cracked. hãthothowe.

to be cracked. hãthothou.

to decrease (the day, nightfall). shinayu.

to tell someone to make something fall. fkemamai.

to kick. kaisi.

to make noise while walking. shurushuruu.

to stay behind for a long time. ãyoritao.

the remains of hallucinogenic after a copious intake. nas.

to make a domesticated bird perch, to let someone make a bird perch, to wait for a bird to perch before shooting an arrow at it. fromai.

to make a domesticated bird perch, to let someone make a bird perch, to wait for a bird to perch before shooting an arrow at it. fromai.

his wife was under, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

at the foot of the mountain, the river flows there. fei kitato ke ki pehithe ha, fei faye a re perire, ihini yare niya prapoma.

under, at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pe.

it is over there, not very far, that the path leads into another. ihami ke a no mãyo he hapraa kure.

to lead into at a certain distance (not very far). he hapraa.

fish, bocón. poko.

expression synonymous with 'those who rub themselves with dye' (referring to the chachalacas birds). hei ki re hirikope (o hei ki re hirikore).

expression synonymous with . hirikore.

to sharpen, to make a point (at the end of an elongated object). yimika si fyimo iheheai.

he carefully sharpened the point of the club. himo ke a yimo wai iheheprai totihironi.

sharp edge or point. iheheprai.

brother-in-law, you have traveled a long distance. kuyão, wa nohi prahakeherayoma.

brother-in-law. kuyão.

to make smaller, fabricate smaller; to give or take in small quantity. wãisipipraw.

(pei) (habla del sur del Orinoco.). hiimotho.

(he/she/it) is the object of someone's friendship or love. puhi yauai.

to be the object of someone. puhi yau.

the hekura prepare magical substances. hekura peni heri a kopematurahe ke.

magical substance. kramo.

(after a detour) we fell in the middle of the path (that we had traveled before). pei yamaki mãyo poushoku ha yamaki fe re fakeiwei.

I stepped on a snake that was lying in the middle (of the path). oru ke ki praope ha ya ki poushoku re katikireiwei.

middle, center. fakeiwei.

the ancestors committed many incests. weremou no motaai ha yaiikuni.

incests. motaai.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness. mi pe shiwetihiãi.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness. shiwetihiãi.

to braid, to interweave fibers. kapirosi.

I approached the place where the gallineta was singing. hãshimo ya wã ahetemakema.

I approached the place where the gallineta was singing. ahetemakema.

cassava flour drink. mayoko huu pe.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashiai.

come to fight me. yare (ware) ta hupayo.

to fight, to combat. hupayo.

las mujeres ciertamente verán el mortero (cuando se trituren los huesos de aquéllos que hayamos matado). suwe ke pe wãrini hii ke hi ka mii totihipehe.

mortero en el que se trituran los huesos de los muertos durante la ceremonia paushimou. totihipehe.

when it is cut, it is extremely tough and viscous (the flesh of the disease demon). the ki pata hãnimou yoripi yihitiwe no kirii (cha.

consistency or texture that a substance has when it is cut. hãnimou.

We arrived at the shapono. shapono ha, prohu.

arrive at a dwelling, arrive at destination. prohu!.

oruga (no identificado (animal, planta)) de pelo urticante. shiãhomi.

to bring the firewood close to the fire. koã ãshoku titetekei.

to bring close to the fire, to draw near the fire. titetekei.

to wrap something for oneself. hãrorei.

father-in-law, what is in the basket that you hung above the fire. shoape, mihi weti pei wa the pe thari yaumaparei kuhe.

it was because I drowned them that they went with the current. ya pe mishi ha tumaparini pe karorowe ha kui.

he entered the collective house after leaving the big basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to cause something to be in a certain position or state, with relation to the speaker, fire, water, above or below. -mapari.

to be very curved along its entire length. hishokowe.

to imitate the double of a person who has become ill due to the loss of their noreshi, to seek the lost double of a person. noreshimou.

to obtain an object that a person has received from another. piyemarei.

to tell someone to make something fall. fkemamai.

when they had already left, the shaman came out of the house and called the jaguar with a whistle. herani, ira a horomirema : cuando ya se habían ido, el chamán salió de la casa y llamó con un chiflido al jaguar.

whistle. chiflido.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they then lived downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

they described a curve while moving. tihiyeprariyoma.

Move in a line (and silently), like the peas. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

1. To line up, align. 2. To tighten (by aligning well) the straw strands of a basket. shaniniã.

it seems that those who went on reconnaissance have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

to discover, to notice something in the jungle. waikikei.

I claim the goods, while the demons of dusk reject my hands. weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hãiihe tehe, ya ta nako sho.

brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do, we will push each other away. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to reject someone, to push someone away. hãiihe.

frutos shosho sin concha estaban esparcidos por el suelo, ellos los recogieron. shosho mope warokoshi mi tikukuoma, mo hokamahe.

they gathered them. hokamahe.

to place someone behind to protect from aggression. sipoamai.

to penetrate a woman (jokingly). fmoroshi epehetou.

to penetrate a woman (jokingly). epehetou.

he/she is my younger sibling. aiye ke a.

younger sibling (brother or sister). eye.

the bats hang upside down. hewe pe mi wereo.

to have the head hanging in the void when lying in a hammock. fhe mi wereo.

to hang upside down. wereo.

¿están todos bien pintados. omawe kekipini rahaka ãiãmo ke ki tahititiraruhawe.

well painted. kekipini.

to curve an object, to give it the shape of an arc of a circumference. payokoamai.

small bird (unidentified) of vivid colors. koetekoetemi.

to crack. hãthothoãi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). kasi wate.

kingfisher. siemato.

you will crouch underneath it. kahe pei ke pehithepi wãri ha wa yereiku.

to place an object underneath, at the foot (of a tree, elevation). fpehithe.

that can be shared, divided. shereramou.

your husband. wãrohe.

the palm spathes used as cases and slid under the roof in which they keep their feathers. karaha re sipe re huupouwei, ihami paushi pe re titipouwehei.

elements that enter into the adornment of women and men (feathers, flowers, bird skins, etc.). huupouwei.

they thought it was a baba (type of animal) and struck the otter with their bows. proro a ma kui ha iwa a hore puhiheni a tiwehamahe.

to believe, to think that, to be convinced of. puhiheni.

to lie one next to another for a moment. hohãthãprou.

we collected yaguas (by plucking them) and ate them. yei yamaki a ukani, yamaki wama.

we collected/gathered (by pulling/plucking). ukani.

to make flutter; to cause to fly. shuriri.

Arrendajo grabbed her by the twisted cotton thread that she carried around her chest. ãyãkorãriweni shinari re iki re hareponowei ha a huwerema.

she carried it around her chest. hareponowei.

to have rolled up (a cord or thread by letting it fall slowly while exerting a circular motion on it). yoririkei.

The son-in-law hunts, fishes and cuts down large trees during the clearing season, also acting as a messenger. siyohamou.

to fulfill the premarital service owed to the in-laws. siyohamou.

to become soft, to sink, to deform. wihihiai.

he/she arrived at his/her house. kama pe yahi hami a koprãriyoma.

arrived at his/her house. koprãriyoma.

when the sun is on the horizon in the afternoon. mothoka hiririwe.

when the sun is on the horizon in the afternoon. hiririwe.

(related to) to be juxtaposed. poa.

to shake vigorously (e. he yomiki.

to jerk one's bent arm abruptly to recover from a blow; to shake one's arm in this way because it is sore or to restore blood circulation when experiencing tingling. yomikiprou.

to shake vigorously. yomiki.

listen to me attentively. yimika ta hirãrãparu.

to listen attentively. hirãrãpar.

if I were to go to his house, I would keep my distance, because he is a bad person, and he would hit me. kamiye ke ya e yahi mi ayoma, ya hewepeherayou, mamikai ke a ta kuo, ya e kutou tikoo mai.

I would keep my distance. hewepeherayou.

to wrap around something, to enroll around something. yãthoriprou.

he slipped at the moment he was passing over (the fallen tree). a wãri rerekou tehe a kaherayoma.

to pass over by striding. rereke.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

to be completely concealed behind or underneath something. shãhowe.

vomit your vomits. kano nahipe ta hoyao.

to vomit. hoyao.

to begin to carry out. pathotho.

he leaned the yagua palm stem along the tree. hii ke hi ha yei ke ãmo hiririmakema.

to lean something along. hiririmakema.

the woman came to my house. kamiye re ya yãnopi ha the u kãi mãu taproyoma.

the woman came to my house. taproyoma.

to become dark, to darken. ruweai.

I put the wapu fruits in to soak. wapu ya ki he paoai.

I will cover the wapu fruits with water (while they are cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to submerge. paoprou.

I'm not saying that I'm going to organize only this funeral ceremony. yãmi ke ya hesi komi koãmai totihio, ya kuu mai.

to make someone consume the ashes of a dead person, to organize a funeral ceremony during which the powdered bones of a dead person are ingested mixed with a banana compote. koãmarei.

in an instant we painted our faces black and on that background, we traced sinuous lines with our nails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to have those lines traced on the face (perfective aspect of durative). tikekerayou.

something similar to the phosphorescence of fireflies has just come out. hawe amakuri ke ki wake re hetirihe (cha.

1. Glow worm; firefly. 2. People of supernatural beings associated with the glow worm.. amakuri.

to stretch down, make wide (a carrying strap) [with plural objects]. prayukamai.

the old man that I killed in the war (who had tied a monkey's tail around his head). fipa ya si re turekeaprai.

to tie a monkey. turekeai.

to finish, exhaust. wathe.

ser distintos unos de otros. picayaiatarou.

I cover my eyes. mi kehuo.

to cover one. kehu.

there are animals in the forest (or: the animals live in the forest). urihi hami yaro pe huu.

the first to climb were all the animals that live in the trees. isi hami pe re huuwei pe hititiwe tua pariketayoma.

to live, to dwell, to inhabit (referring to animals). huuwei.

to have. iki.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

plant. planta.

to have a sore finger, to have an injured finger. fimiki no ushuwe.

to have a sore finger, to have an injured finger. no ushuwe.

slightly curved (perfective aspect of the inchoative). wãheterayou.

thanks to the soap, no doubt it will become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to have become clean/white (perfective of the inchoative). aurayou.

what does it matter if we remain alone, they will go hunting (lit. pei peheki yãmio peo, totori the pe taepe.

to be alone, to remain alone. yãmio.

the night. the mi titi.

ant. titi.

to fill. maniki.

to be about to fall off or detach. ihehou.

not be completely full. hayaroprawe.

they criticize me. yare wãhã wayoaihe.

is criticizing the only thing you Yanomami know how to do. yãnomãmi yama the pe wãhã ta wayoa sho, wamaki puhi kuu shiroãi yaio thawe.

to tell, relate. wãhã wayoai.

Unknown. ishi.

to divide, separate, share. sherera.

a type of small bird belonging to the genus Thamnophilus (Thamnophilidae), with bluish-gray plumage and white spots on the wings. ushishimi.

they are the ones who make me advance ahead as an explorer (when they go to war). re the peni yare nosi pariapraramai totihiowei.

to advance ahead as an explorer. pariapraramai.

as the yawari woman has clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to change one. aithaa.

to have the back arched. fkohesi yãprekewe.

to have an arched back. yãprekewe.

I struck down the wild boar instantly. ware ya mi tithea shoarema.

to strike down, fell. tithe.

to speak. mi yãhu.

motor, usually an outboard motor. mororo.

he was carrying green plantains hanging from a vine, and on top he had placed ripe ones. atha ke ki rukeka no yehipoma, heaka hami wake the ki makepom a.

1. To hook, to get entangled. 2. To detect a very faint sound.. ruke.

to be angry. hãrohã.

1. Assist a sick person by rubbing them. 2. Touch, caress (as a sign of affection, friendship). hurikai.

they excavated in a place where the monster's lair was narrow. hepisiope ha the ka tiyei shoaomahe.

they excavated in a place where the monster. hepisiope.

breaking into pieces by hitting from above. yaresheanando.

her daughter was truly pubescent: she had breasts. pe thee e pata totihiwe, a hãkãm i o m a.

to be forming breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). hãkãmii.

to be hungry. hãshãmi.

to start shaving one. mãrokoshipramor.

we shot arrows at them and they cried: "hokiã. the ha niyakini : "hokiã. hokiã. hokiã. ". ", e pe kuma.

cry of alarm. hokiã.

quiver cover, usually an animal skin. fthora a ka he.

to kill a man (ceremonial dialogue) (lit. fthora kusheai.

to put a blowgun in one's mouth (to blow harmful substances at someone). fthorapi weiai.

quiver. thora.

to make small, to fabricate small; to give or take in small quantity. wãisipiai.

we have passed the path where our enemies could walk (lit. pei ke yo nohimou mai pema yo nohãmipramarei ma re kuhe ke.

to pass, to leave behind. nohãmipramarei.

to become stained or speckled (with black). ãrishãpiãi.

complex verb form composed of the iterative -taa-, the causative or permissive -ma-, and the perfective -re, followed by a tense marker. -taamari.

tomorrow I will work in the fields (downriver). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

downriver, downstream. -imakiri.

my companion is affected by the life principle (of the jaguar he killed). thãriye pe wai hihathoprai ke a kure.

to be infected by the life principle of a killed being (human or animal). hihathoprai.

to be completely red, to have reddish reflections over the entire surface. wahehewe.

tree. pore.

the one who (performs such and such action). Tie-.

open your ears, you who carry a bird skin on your back. siki re yehipoimi yimika thaa ta pariri.

you who carry a bird skin on your back. yehipoimi.

to miss a target repeatedly. blansiki.

they went around the rock wall of the mountain. pei re maki kothe hami the pe ãyorima.

to go around a rock wall or cliff. ãyorima.

Cook the cassava and give it to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to give food to someone. yamai.

to fluidify, to make less dense. hereshikei.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying and swinging the torso and arms a lot. rahumou.

I do not go to the mountainous regions (lit. hehu keki uprao hami pei re ya torekoimi yaiwe.

I do not climb. torekoimi.

to ask someone to hang their hammock in the lower part of the roof. shikããmai.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. hiropraroimi.

your penis was being bitten by the fish. tu u pe weheo tehe kuratha si pe niya tiai re koã.

your. tu u.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisiprou.

reach the place where we have gone to hunt and kill the tapirs. hei koro ha pemaki ta henimoprei hami, wamaki ha hur oherini, ware ki ta niyaprari.

that is where they intend to go for a prolonged hunt. kiha pe pe niya heniyomou kuprei.

to go for a prolonged hunt. henimoprei.

to be without fire (person, meat being smoked), to sleep without fire. ruwemorã-.

plural object, dispersed. ãsiprawe.

are they going to prepare that strap for (carrying) the pot. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

to prepare a strap/cord. thaare.

perfective of the durative, plural object (of hahetimai). hahetirarei.

my scalp hurts because of the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

having experienced a painful sensation due to a superficial injury (an irritation, a tear of the skin, a burn, a blister, etc.). ushirariyo.

they passed one after another, clinging to the trees (that were floating). the pe yetekeo tehe, the pe hayupraama (mit.

to join one after another a group of combatants. yetepraai.

all of them have returned. pe koã haikirayoherima.

they have returned completely. haikirayoherima.

they burned the dead body today. hei tehe pe pomorayoma.

he didn't answer quickly and got heated up (= got heated up before answering). a wã huo haionomi, the pomoma.

to warm up, to heat up, to burn a dead body. pomo.

(she) immediately rubbed against her, and she insulted her. mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma (mit.

we are both ugly and bad, and we have insulted each other. peheki wãri wãritiwe yahatuayou totihio ke a kuhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to insult a person, to offend them by publicly proclaiming their physical imperfections (real or presumed). yahatuai.

am I not here like a frog or like a mapanare lying on the ground. the wãri yoyo yerea ta kurani, the ki aroami praa ta kurani, the pe wãri ma ta kuorani.

I never think of going to share fish at my older brother's house, I do not say that. ãiwe iha yuri ya e ta ria sho, ya kuorani kunomai.

to say, to tell. kuorani.

sickly. oenfermizo.

en un instante la mujer estuvo encinta y su vientre rápidamente engrosó. yetu ke e maka kãi pata ha kuparuni.

el mosquito está hinchado de sangre. ukushi a maka.

to have a belly; to be pregnant. mamaika.

he broke his arm with a stick blow. naprushini kama poko yahekirema.

I broke the electric eel in two by hitting it. koã ãsho ya yahekiprarema.

to break into several pieces. yahekirarei.

to be completely red, to have reddish reflections over the entire surface. wahehewe.

noise of a metallic object when struck by a hard object. krehemo.

to tap or flick with fingers to remove dirt or insects. yootho.

inform. wã hem i.

to gather, to assemble. urukuprou.

to gather, to assemble. uruku.

it transforms into a chrysalis. si yomou.

to transform into a chrysalis. yomo.

the canoe capsized. kanawa a he ohorayoma.

to capsize (a canoe). ohorayoma.

he closed the hole firmly. a ka kahua rohothokema.

closed firmly. rohothokema.

funerary. funerarios.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

object that was worked by crushing it with the incisors. washisha.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

1. small. 2. To scratch or uncover the ground with the foot to . hãrãrukei.

I struck down the wild boar instantly. ware ya mi tithea shoarema.

to strike down, fell. tithe.

(speaks of upriver). tokre.

he ate everything and returned home in a state of being a killer and being satiated. a unokai ha kopoherini, petiri.

to return home in a state of being a killer and being satiated. kopohoroni.

the children were afraid of him and fled in all directions. i hiru peni a no kiri thaihe ha pe ruapraroma (mit.

to flee in all directions. ruapraroma.

to sink into the water under the weight of something. kaokoo.

quantity of something. peherikei.

to strip a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pahathomai.

he peeled the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to remove the outer layer of an object; to peel, shell, bark, scrape. roshiãi.

to succeed someone in a job, in a ceremonial dialogue. nomihipramai.

to split off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pakaro.

to perforate (synonym). tirosho.

the multibandeados tilingos have transverse lines on the chest. piremari koshi pe pariki yãpruta.

to have a transverse line or stripe; to paint a transverse line on the body. yãpruta.

we lived by the river, it was then that they began to detest us. para ke u ha wamare nohi wãrirema.

since I detest them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

to feel resentment towards someone. wãrirema.

to host someone. yãpou.

it is heavy. a hute.

heavy. hute.

they killed váquiros and gave the broth of the cooked (meat) to drink (= they killed váquiros and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

the young men shot arrows at the fish. huya peni yuri pe niyamahe.

they killed, they shot. niyamahe.

to have a slip of the tongue, to use one word for another. hãroprariyo.

go fast to see what that unknown noise is. yan rápido a ver qué es ese ruido desconocido.

fast. rápido.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying and swinging the torso and arms a lot. rahurahumou.

say that to deceive. wa nomohori ha kuni.

trap, betrayal, trick, deception. nomohori.

He put the termite nest on the ground and broke it with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

1. To open by tearing, to tear the wrapping of a package with the fingers; to break with the hand. 2. To hollow out the earth by scratching with the fingers. huresheai.

the small stream of water becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to terminate abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horokoprou.

send your mother there to harvest corn, where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to emerge (elongated object). shorokai.

long ago, the bees spoke. hei hapa totihiwe puu pe ã hama.

to speak. ãhama.

to have entrusted an object, or a child, to someone. hemapou.

younger sibling. heparaye.

burned (perfective, plural object). ishirariyo.

I will return another day. opi ya huu koope.

later, another time, again, another day. fopi.

he fell ill far from home (due to my manipulations). totoprai.

to have fallen. iheherariyo.

His belly is swelling up. Makasi yahetai.

to have a swollen belly; to be full (of food). makasi yahete.

to delirate, to speak incoherently. aka porepiai.

he/she is my younger brother/sister. aiye ke a.

his/her younger brother/sister. pe ai.

my younger brother engendered him. aiyeni ke a tararema.

younger sibling. aiyeni.

to scratch oneself repeatedly. tikekerayou.

¿cuántos hay. weti naha the kua.

how much?. ¿cuánto?.

before leaving, they arranged a row of palm leaves stuck in the ground. pe the pe humapi reprou tehe, wãima henaki re ithãkeiwehei.

they arranged a row of palm leaves stuck in the ground. ithãkeiwehei.

we walk in a line. katiwe yamaki huu.

to be in a line. katiwe.

while they were digging them up, they were digging up the batatas. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe, huko mo pe mayepimow a p u.

to dig up, to unearth. mayepimow.

if you insist on going you will make yourself be killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini wa shemoparu.

to make oneself kill. -mopariyo.

because he is brave he is generous. pe perio ke yaro a shi ihite.

a brave man. fperio.

noise. weke.

to have traced several transverse lines. yãprutarei.

ho ko re w e: 1. ho ko re w e: 1. To have a knot (wood). Tener un nudo (madera). 2. 2. To be knotted in various parts (binding). Estaré anudado en varias partes (atadura).

in various parts. perire.

bullet ant; Paraponera clavata (Hymenoptera: Ponerinea). Venomous ant, its sting is painful and its effects persist for a long time.. shifo.

to be in a hurry. moremorema.

the ancestors became more and more numerous. porepore ke ki re parai totihionowei.

they became more and more numerous. totihionowei.

pie de tortuga. Asteraceae.

they (two) shot arrows at the tapir while it was swimming across the Heritha river. heritha u ha shama a karei tehe a niyapima.

to cross by swimming. karekei.

central space or plaza in the open air. hehã.

the effect of the malefic substance still greatly disturbs me. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

1. To fill completely, to fill to the brim. 2. To be greatly affected by the action of a magical substance. raho.

she left the mark of her passage through the corn field. kihami re mo siki yãrãruã thaa re shoareheriiwei.

to leave a mark on the vegetation when passing through it. yãrãruã.

son, prepare a strap for me to carry. pusi yare natha ta thakiyo.

strap, cord, belt made of bark. thakiyo.

it seems that they are losing their strength. the pe mimou he yaharokotou.

losing their strength. yaharokotou.

the nearby ones, the close communities. re miowei.

nearby, close by, vicinity. miowei.

the child is moaning. ihiru a re ãkãmiãmou.

to moan, to whimper. ãkãmiãmou.

to make a concave mark inadvertently. wãhihipramai.

The woman was sitting on the ground removing lice from her hair. mrakatahu a kuope ha tiresheai kure.

1. To remove lice stuck to hair by squeezing them with the nails and making them slide slowly; to detach meat fragments from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tiresheakei.

we advance towards you, a light ãmoamo plant inserted into the hole of our lower lip. yamaki husi ka no ãmoãmopi hena karei ta kuikiyo (cha.

a light plant inserted into the hole in the lower lip. ãmoãmopi.

I arrived after they were peeling the guama pods and I sat down. ya waro ha hetaikuni, krepo u pe wãri washeaihe tehe ya rokema.

to peel green plantains using nails and teeth. uminosa.

hunter who participates in. heni.

to never miss a shot. yaketou.

to never miss a shot. yaketou.

I am better now, my state of health continues to improve little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to begin to fly (a bird), to improve after an illness, to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). ehetai.

to wish misfortune on someone. waheo.

to have started to experience muscle pains. hayeherirariyo.

son, prepare a strap to carry me. pusi yare natha ta thakiyo.

will they finally prepare that strap for (carrying) the pot. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

bark, rope, strap made of bark. iwaiwa.

blink repeatedly. misi rahorahomou.

blink repeatedly, close eyes several times in a row. rahorahomou.

volvió a trepar e inició la última parte de su ascenso [peshekuprou, term. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

volvió a trepar e inició la última parte de su ascenso. koonowei.

to surround someone, to surround a dwelling. hãyopei.

He is angry. rerokotorawe akasi.

to be angry. akasi.

they used to go to the forest to roast caterpillars over the fire. uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaati re ayaonowei.

they used to, they had the habit of. ayaonowei.

that's how the pijiguaos are. hei naha rasha ke pe kuwe.

to be (in a certain way), to exist, to possess (a characteristic). kuwe.

it was because we did not really pursue you that you are still alive. pe nosi wãri teprai katitio ha maoni wa hore wãri temi.

to be always willing to accompany in the forest those who go in search of food. nosi tepou.

we orient ourselves and return to follow the path. yamaki re kateheprouwei, yama yo nosi re tea koreiwei.

to pursue, harass, corner; to be always willing to accompany in the forest those who go in search of food; to follow a trail, path. tepou.

to produce several portions by tearing, separating or pulling apart a round object with both hands in opposite directions. hahathomai.

on the summit, on the peak (of a mountain, of a hill). fpororo hami.

on the summit, on the peak. fpororo.

to have been completely painted with transverse lines. iprutuprou.

to be angry. rutaruta.

sobre un cerro, sobre una loma. fhehu a wai hami.

está situado a media altura sobre la montaña. hehu a shithema hami the kua.

el camino está en el costado de la montaña. hehu a shithema hami yo kua.

hill, slope, mountain. fhehu.

Taste of a liquid. koa.

in the waterfall called waretha, above that waterfall was where, being a child, I really woke up. waretha a pora re yaupe, ihi a pora feaka ha, the puﬁ moyawea totihirihe.

waterfall, rapids. waretha.

to be about to make an object with one side higher than the other. wereheprou.

separate. tishi.

In the mythology of some upriver communities (speaks of upriver), Kuripowe is the master of tobacco, and responsible for its introduction among human beings.. Kuripowe.

to be brittle. yeririwe.

to become happy. puhi owehetou.

to become happy, satisfied, content (upon receiving good news or a desired gift). owehetou.

¿van a preparar esa correa para (llevar) la olla. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

correa (strap, cord). thaare.

al llegar a su casa, los rodeamos inmediatamente. yama pe he hãyoprai shoarayoma.

to surround, to encircle (enemies or animals) in small separated groups; to be about to encircle. hãyomorayou.

to become hardened, deformed by heat. toreke.

to sleep deeply. fmio sutao.

to sleep deeply. sutakei.

to reach someone quickly. nosi huriprao.

to reach someone quickly. huriprao.

to live alternately. peripaai.

the fish that swirl around in large quantities (= the fish that swim in large quantities in the river). hei ki re shurirorati.

to flutter, to be raised or agitated by the wind, to swirl around; to agitate in large quantities. shuririai.

term. okoshiprou.

they approached to see. the mii mi re ikukeiwei.

to approach quickly with a purpose. ikukeiwei.

how my kidneys hurt. fpoushokuye yai.

how my kidneys hurt!. fpoushokuye.

to hide an object behind another. shãhoprou.

tábano, pegón (no identificado). popukuye.

I will not separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I will go downstream to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

to go live apart, to separate from others to live elsewhere. kasipariyo.

¿te dejo las sobras. ahe ya shee ta hepei.

to leave leftovers. sheemai.

to let the fruits spoil through negligence. eotoamai, caus.

spoil, rot. echar a perder.

also called. llama.

went to the bottom. hushomirayou.

their bows. erekeprawe.

small bird; Pachyramphus sp. (Tyrannidae). koãpatarami.

to repair a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakaai.

to enumerate, to count using the fingers. fimiki kuprou.

to enumerate, to count using the fingers. karo.

on the ridge. fmatoto hami.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. fmatotowe yo.

ridge, top of a mountain. fmatoto.

to be afraid. mratamratamo.

give me onoto. a no nanapi ta yãpari.

onoto, a reddish-brown dye or pigment made from the seeds of the achiote tree. yãpari.

to cook quickly a food (plantain, root or tuber), putting it directly on the fire. frãrãrããi.

he thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

to become thinner, to become finer. ishinapiai.

"although she is a woman, if they hit me, I do not move away". "hii hiki wãri yarikou ma kui, kamiye suwe ya ma kui ya tikukuimi".

not move away to avoid blows. tikukuimi.

to become small (referring to a cotton ball whose thread has been partially used). ãkroprou.

Guamo tree. thibaudiana.

to make war. yahatu.

atacar a los enemigos. fnape shurukai.

to attack enemies. fnape.

at dawn they left, each one on their own, to kill paujies (and by the result I realized that) their arrows with harpoon points had not missed the target. paruri pe nape ha huomopotuheni, pe the pe no kroshokroshoprao henaopereshi.

to kill paujies (birds) with arrows with harpoon points. henaopereshi.

she transformed into a guabina fish. a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

she transformed into a guabina fish. ishawaritomiprariyoma.

to lose its extremity. hemathaprou.

mother-in-law, go get water so I can drink. yape, miha mãu u ta yakea, ya u ta koa.

I go to get water. mãu ya u yakeai.

to get (using a container), to go get water. yakeai.

she hung the package from her father's hammock rope. pe f ii ke peki thapi ha a fãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

package. fãro.

with his blowgun, he shot a dart towards the momo fruits that hung in clusters. momo kosiki mi shimokore re weteteatayouwei ha the horaama.

to form clusters; to be abundant, in great quantity. teatayou.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for their house then. kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe (cha.

to inhale hallucinogens. epenamoti.

he hung the hammock up high again. isi ha pe ki hirihiã ha koikuni.

to hang a hammock. hirihiãi.

to deploy (in order to surround, encircle). ithorokoprou.

stumbled, tripped due to weakness. yoteteray.

to make rebound, to make bounce. mãiãmai.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

small arrow made of bamboo or hardwood palm. masiki.

to growl. misisiãmou.

in the eyes, there where the worms climbed, termites swarm. ereerema re kona shipe rãirãiprarou.

to swarm, to teem. rãi.

habla de río arriba. wãkomi.

to empty. proko.

the son of Zorro guapán was his son-in-law. hoarifanawe ke ihirupi pe hekamapi ke e kuoma (mit.

he let himself fall surreptitiously into the hollow of the tree while his son-in-law was busy removing a thorn from his foot. pe hekamapi misiki e washai tehe a kea hãthokema, hii ka ha (mit.

his/her son-in-law. hekamapi.

people who hate us. hetutuhei.

the messenger of the party appeared suddenly in the dwelling saying: tu, tu, tu. tu, tu, tu.

to appear suddenly, to arrive abruptly. yaparayoma.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisirayou.

the pubic hairs full of lice of the female toucan come fluttering here. mayepiriyoma pe no weshiki no nomapi re shuririyope.

to flutter, be lifted or agitated by the wind, swirl around in large quantities. shuriri.

to remove something by scratching once with the fingernail; to scratch someone once. tikokoprai.

(habla de río arriba). here.

water. urerai.

null. horomorewe.

to crack, to split open. nashoai.

I pull the vines (to break them). thoo ya thotho ikokai.

to approach, to get close, to come near. ikokoprai.

Exclamation of surprise. tou!.

antonym. kirithami.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic plant), to have the edges of an object separated, to be shallow (of water). hehete.

the wind was violent and the trees were bent over one another. ikãri the watorimoma, hiki makekoma.

to be bent over one another. makekoma.

the Yanomami transformed into váquiros. yãnomãmi the pe wareprariyoma.

they transformed into váquiros (a type of animal). wareprariyoma.

pedir ser invitado. wã no ohiãmou.

to ask to be invited to a friendly community when one has nothing left to eat in their conuco. ohiãm.

Sorocuá cola blanca went to search for the product of the hunt. kurekurethaweni yaro re a koãi mi ukukema (mit.

to go to search for the product of the hunt. kurekurethaweni.

Arrendajo la agarró por el entorchado de algodón que ella llevaba alrededor del pecho. ãyãkorãriweni shinari iki re harepouwei ha a huerema.

algodón. shinari.

one and the other bathed. ke kipi yãrimoma.

they bathed (one and the other). yãrimoma.

to divide into several parts. hakaromai.

to squeeze against each other. hisiniprou.

the two women sat down slowly on the edge of the hammock, then one of them lay down against it. ke kipi re tipeariyouwei, yetu ai ke a re yakakeiwei.

they sat down slowly on the edge of the hammock. tipeariyouwei.

gavilán, ave de rapiña (Buteo sp). siehemi kiri hena.

the path splits into several others. yo shererewe.

to divide, split into parts. nini*.

I will go to live elsewhere (lit. ya he ononoo totihio mai ke the.

the Yanomami will never stop blowing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

not to stay still; not to take the time to do something. onono.

to place at a good distance (neither too close nor too far), to bring closer what is too far away, to move away what is too close. ayekeamai.

it is there where the electric eel is, where the bubbles rise to the surface (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to form bubbles, to rise to the surface (of bubbles). porirou.

give me a little. manahewe the ta hiyo.

a little, in small quantity. manahewe.

when they sit one after the other, they have to make you sit in the center. the pe roo yehihimou tehe, mi ãmo ha ke wa kãi romapouhe.

to make someone sit in a certain position. romapouhe.

the dog bit me (once). hiimani yare si wetirema.

I will bite you several times. pe si wetirarei.

you will not bite his forehead. pei huko hami wa si wetiai mai (mit.

to bite once. wetirei.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal or plant). proromahiwe.

guamo caraota fruit. wãkãma.

the sun was declining when he arrived home. mothoka kaiprou tehe a koã kopema.

large (nauseating) mushrooms sprouted leaning. yore pe pata kaihou shoaoma (mit.

to incline, to decline (of celestial bodies). kaia.

to darken (perfective inceptive). ruwerayou.

sweetened. kretetikei.

to tie, to bind tightly with a knot or very tight loop. prohohokei.

the house of the h e k ura sways from side to side (while being transported). yahi wa hute pata ta ataataaprarou thare.

to oscillate, to sway from side to side. ataatamou.

he stopped when he was very close (to him). prake ha a re upraopariyowei.

he stopped when he was very close (to him). upraopariyowei.

to do this (removing a liquid circularly using a stick, particularly something being cooked) several times in succession. yakoretaakei.

when he had already left, the shaman went out of the house and called the jaguar with a whistle. herani, ira a horomirema.

when he had already left, the shaman went out of the house and called the jaguar with a whistle. horomirema.

the hekura were about to kill her in an instant. hekura peni a mori shea roparema.

I won't do anything to you (lit: I won't hit you). pe shei mai ke the.

to hit; to kill. shei.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to stay behind when others leave; to constitute a remainder. heikioma.

to kill, to cause death; to kill an animal by clubbing it. chape.

he quickly placed a dart in the blowgun that he shot at the end of Titiri's wing. yeture e masi ha titipraparini, titiri pei yoohoapiki hami the horakema.

to place an object in a container or cavity. titiai.

to coil or curl completely. wapureprou.

semen. moumou.

he separated the firebrands quickly and set fire to the leaves. kai ke wake ha kushetarini henaki wake piyemak e m a.

to untie quickly, to separate quickly. kushetarini.

to break several objects. senyaresherarei.

I am hungry. tokona sihi.

to be hungry. tokona.

to feel good. puhi totihitaai.

to feel good, to improve, to fix, to repair, to order, to classify. totihitaai.

to be hungry. ãyukurami.

a wasp stung me. kopinani yare tikarema.

wasp. kopinani.

in what refers to water, we will not lack it. pemaki rii yapekeope, mãu ke upe ha.

to have fallen ill (and due to this to have disrupted the course of one. yapekerayou.

mosi. sururuaemi.

to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (by repeated impacts). pookosiprou.

Sure. hão, weti the ha hi rii hipekei.

he has given the bow. hipekei.

(no clear translation provided). pehiki.

to stand with one foot slightly ahead of the other, and the hand on. kaihi.

neck (more specifically). aharao.

the cat of mottled snout. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

spotted, mottled. hayapisi.

the ground was dry and hard. ithãcuando.

if you provoke my anger, you will lose. kamiye ke ware hushuo ha shurukuruni, pe no premakei.

to provoke someone. shurukou.

the man had just become initiated as a shaman, he arrived where the termites with white plumes on their heads were standing. yãnomãmi thaamamo no tute ke the, osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

to become initiated as a shaman. thaamamo.

to rise; to grow; to elevate, to place on high. tireai.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, really making me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

they made me stagger. totihioheni.

I will go to get powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them spin). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

I will direct them towards you (making them spin). shoakeyoruu.

stop complaining about not having received a share. nakimou mai wa wãri ha kuoni.

to complain about not having received a share in a distribution of food, or to complain about not having received the share one expected to receive. nakimor.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club on him. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to make something or someone fall by pushing them down an inclined plane. nihoromakei.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

to be about to gather, group, assemble. kokãprai.

repeat what was heard (often distorting it in a biased way). wãnomou.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

it is a fairly thick tree. okotoma ke hi.

young. huya.

to be about to cover one. horoipramoray.

hekura associated with the animal. washoriwe.

to be mixed with people from another community. tikuruwe.

to be mixed. tikuru.

your teeth are so big (that I'm afraid). wa naki pata kuyehewemi.

to induce renunciation or abandonment of something. fkuyehemi.

the two trees are already connected to each other (one can pass from one to the other). a wãri ihirãã waikia kure.

to be united, to be in contact, to allow passage. ihirãã.

to become downy (human), to become tomentose (plant). shipeii.

he is worn out, eroded (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). waruhurayou.

the (cut off) head moved and came to rub against the leg. pei ke heni matha hurii kuaai ha yaioni.

to rub, to touch, to employ a magical substance. hurii.

To have such or such an aspect. tapramorayou.

to be convinced that someone is a braggart or a chatterbox, to be convinced that a person will not carry out their threats. nohi hehe-.

(I tell) my brother-in-law: "Go with your dog to kill agoutis". heriye ke a hore re kui ha.

my brother-in-law. heriye.

to move around - 1 intransitive verb: yaokoai, incomplete: to move around the village. yaoko 1 vb.

to move around. yaoko.

to remove the outer layer of multiple objects. roshiãkei.

they appeared; one and the other were big. the kipi wawet theiai.

to slip and fall on one. theiprakei.

to have (like the horãma birds) a snort that precedes one's physical presence in a place. fheã no horãmapi.

to have (like the horãma birds) a snort or sound that precedes one. horãmapi.

to become pot-bellied, to become big-bellied. makasiai.

(related form of yakeke). si yakeke.

abundant, bountiful (said of clusters of pijiguao fruits hanging from a palm tree). yoakama.

that breath that had been cut off (the hekura) they restored (= they returned life to the dead). hei mishiãki hematha re kui, mishiãki hapa re horimapohei.

to restore life, to revive. horimapohei.

null. e naha re the he tipetewe.

to be one next to another (rounded objects). tipeteprawe.

to place in the center, in the middle. ãmoãkei.

"those are your own burned bones. kahe ke wa ishipe. ", shouted the parrot. werehi a wãri ta no kutarureshini.

calcined bones of a dead person after the cremation of the body; crushed bones during the paushimou ritual. ishipe.

I'm going to take this woman as wife. ya amishi ta koo sho.

to take a wife. shatio.

chewing tobacco (prepared tobacco, ready to chew). fpee nahe ashi (habla del sur del Orinoco.

chewing tobacco (prepared tobacco, ready to chew). fpee.

the noise is moving away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to diminish gradually (noise, voice). nashirayou.

to call or attract attention by making a brief sucking sound, placing the tongue against the alveolar ridge (in front or laterally). teketekemorãyou.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I thrust the point into it. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to place or be against someone. tisuo.

las niguas se desprenden (de los pies adonde están alojadas). ihu nape hayoyai.

to detach, to come loose. hayoyai.

I asked that they grate manioc (and make casabe). nashi hiki hirikimahe.

I asked (for something to be done). hirikimahe.

is always calling out, shouting. komipethawe.

the small stream becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to narrow, to close off, not allowing passage (a stream, a path). horokoai.

during the night the inflorescence of the manaka palm will incline. titi ha manaka ãthe mi wereprariyo.

will incline. wereprariyo.

courage of one who is always ready to defend himself and punish insults. waiteri.

divide your wad of tobacco into two. pee nahe hakoprai.

to divide a wad of tobacco into two equal parts. hakoprai.

Mirewakariwe shot a poisoned dart at the eye of the tragavenado. mirewakariweni hokoto keki mamo horapema.

Blowing, he shot (the deadly substance) at the wing joint of Titiri. titiri pei yoohoapiki hami the horakema.

to blow a malefic substance at someone, to shoot a poisoned dart at someone. horapema.

I eat in the forest. Uu krooko pei.

to eat. krooko.

they stopped very close to you. pei re wa mi tharipi ha pe upratareyoruu kuroi.

They stopped. upratareyoruu.

to be sad (in the absence of a loved one). okii.

to dig a shallow hole. maketi.

I pull the banana plant towards me (to knock it down and collect the bunch). kuratha ya siki iyoai.

You young people, go and tension your bows near the paths (go ambush at the edge of the paths, in case the enemies arrive). ihiru pe, pei yoka pe hami the ta iyoa ayaapotuhe.

1. To pull towards oneself, to attract. 2. To lift a hammock by tying it in the middle (to prevent someone from lying in it). 3. To tension a bow.. iyoa.

butterfly. furafura.

lay on belly (perfective). rehokei.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they then lived downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

to describe a curve while moving (perfective form). tihiyerayou.

Woodpecker started to scrape the bark of the curare vine. ripuhusiriweni mamokori ke a hoãi shoapariyoma.

Woodpecker discovered the dangerous curare. ripuhusiriweni mamokori ke a wayu tararei no kureshi.

woodpecker. ripuhusiriweni.

1. To get caught or tangled when falling (tree), to get entangled (with another tree). 2. To descend abruptly from a hammock. waheheprou.

make the child come to the center of the group. ihiru a ta mi ãmopari.

to place someone in the center of a group or in the middle of the water. ãmomai.

to stumble, to falter (due to the effect of a load). tihoprakei.

towards the back, to sway. auy.

to photograph, to film. puﬁpe toai.

to speak of upriver. puﬁpe.

to make. ohotatou : hacer.

to make. ohotatou.

as the stone is heavy, the liana breaks. maa the ma hute ha thotho krininimou.

I will carry a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

heavy. fhute.

recently burned and still unplanted plot of a conuco, over which ashes and embers have been scattered. fãrãre.

the feathers of the blue cotinga swirl in the wind. hei heimi suuku no watori re shuririope ye.

Feathers of a bird after being plucked. suuku.

and if I transfer it to another pot. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to transfer, to decant. heiakei.

but his penis was gigantic. pei ke the mo pata kua ha yairaruni.

gigantic. yairaruni.

(it) became hardened and dried by the heat. the hupamou ro.

to become rough, dry, rigid. ro-.

to become generous (while before one was not), to feel like giving (while before one did not feel like it). ihitaprou.

to stay for a moment in the center. thariprou.

to have someone paint one. shopohomou.

ellos se convirtieron en coatíes. yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma (mit.

coati, zorro guache. yarushe.

animal of prey, game animal. maka-.

to be hungry. ãhimopi.

to be slightly sweetened. fkretetihi.

express one. heheprarai.

go to the other side (of the shelter). ai the mashi hami pe ta kuparu.

to be on the other side. kuparu.

in the past the Yanomami did not have plants of the 'low' species of cambur. hapa yãnomãmi peni yahatotorimi pe thaponomi.

plants of the . thaponomi.

to hang by the arms for a short time. yakukutou.

listen well. a yimika ta utuparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to prick up one. yimika utu.

intestinal worms. hígasherereamo.

when you obtain a good hunting dog, you show satisfaction (by saying: ae minahami). yama e hiyoka wãi koãi ha, ae minahami.

to show satisfaction (when obtaining a good hunting dog or avenging the death of a good hunter). minahami.

to be dispersed in the forest in various camps. kasihiwe.

don't look at others while hiding. a mi yeheatihe.

don. yeheatihe.

spacious, uncluttered (in the forest). hikokoã.

palm cut into strips to make a fire fan. shuhema mishiki.

he took the basket fibers and started weaving. yorofi ke mishiki re furihireiwei, e the tiyema.

material ready to be woven. mishiki.

to have oneself painted with dots. tipikamou.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to look behind, to turn an object 180 degrees, to invert the sides or ends. hemihi.

I got lost following the path. pei yo ha ya yakerayoma.

to get lost. yakerayoma.

to unravel, untwist, unthread, undo fiber by fiber (perfective, plural object). kushesherarei.

to probe (incomplete aspect). hipiai.

untie the rope of the boat. kanawa a natha kusheprari.

to untie, to loosen. kusheprari.

to bruise in one place. wãokor.

when the Yanomami woman arrived at her house. do a la mujer yãnomãmi, él llegó a su casa.

woman. mujer.

why don't you give me some wood. wama the ãsho pe wai hore sherereaimi yaro.

give me. sherereaimi.

a plant with thick fleshy leaves, sagittate-ovate in shape, that grows on the water. boroboro.

shitawe. shitami.

the blood started gushing out in spurts. yeiye ke ki, siriri, siriri.

blood gushing from a wound. siriri!.

there are muddy grounds, do not approach. heãro wamaki ahetou mai.

hang your hammock below your husband's. pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokorei.

muddy ground in which one sinks. heãro.

to be good. hosho nou.

to be. nou.

peach palm fruit. rasha.

there is not much. a peherimi o a peheri kuami.

in small quantity, in small number. peherimi.

he is cured completely. a temi heikiagou.

to be in a certain state or condition completely; very. ithorokoverbo.

perceptible smell thanks to the movement of air. warou.

to become completely visible (after having been hidden behind something). waeheprou.

come, come, hit me. pei, pei yare ta sheri.

hit me. sheri.

as the night was getting dark, he approached the woman. the mi ka ha komãtaaruni suwe ke iha a ikuoma.

to get dark (night falling). komãtaaruni.

to receive leftovers. waiki.

to fire several shots one after the other. thoothoomou.

was loud (noise, voice). nakrerayou.

to have a worried look. puﬁki ushuhuwe.

to be worried. puﬁki.

brother-in-law, represent things clearly, when you achieve it, manifest your anger. shoriwe a puhi ta wararaparu, wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

to recall clearly, to represent clearly a distant event. wararai.

to dig a shallow hole. maketiai.

the Yawari woman has transformed me, let my mental faculties change then. yãwãriyoma ware shi ha wãrimarini, ya puhi aithaa ta toithipe.

to transform, to change someone. wãrimarini.

to be lying in a hammock that sags and is too deep. kuyahi.

the mosquitoes do not let (one) sleep. ukushi peni the pe mipramaimi.

indicates impossibility. fprama.

to become oblong; to elongate slightly. torohou.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

having crushed, having softened with the hand. hushikiãrei.

to make (something) splash once. hamishiai.

to tell someone to begin softening an object or to soften it locally. epeheamai.

to make splash (factitive). hamishi.

it is there where the electric eel is, where the bubbles rise to the surface (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to form bubbles, to rise to the surface (of bubbles). porirou.

The jaguar, carrying the dog on its neck, was completely alike. téntico jaguar, cargaba al perro sobre el cuello.

to be completely alike, to resemble like two drops of water. yaipimi.

always. hisiempre.

sun. taña.

to make scream with pain. hiyohiyomomai.

to salt. sayuprai.

we crossed the water passing through the morichal. eteweshi siki ha yamaki ha pekatutaparuni.

passing through, crossing. pekatutaparuni.

they ran in pursuit to the place where the people were gathered. hikari hami praki a hukai mi rereo re shoatariyonowei.

they ran in pursuit. shoatariyonowei.

without a doubt it slipped under the roof. a huure ke the.

to slide or slip under the roof. huure.

the souls arrived in a group at the dwelling, they really arrived like that. porepore ke pe warerou ha kuikiyoni, pe warerou ha yaiparuni.

to enter or exit in a compact mass composed of many elements, to penetrate in a group into a dwelling; to expel in a block a mass composed of many elements. warere.

to be at rest (an animal). hothoo.

¿quién se encuentra al pie del monte Morãmana que se alza allá. hei morãmana ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi ke ki kothe ha, weti ke a wãri roa.

a place name (likely a mountain). Morãmana.

the cut of the tree is deep. hi ka mi shoekewe.

to cut deeply (a tree). shoekekei.

to be decorated in that form with a hand. raokoa.

I'm going to repair the torn cotton hammock. yii ya ki tiyeparei.

to pierce, stab, fix in, stick, harpoon, strike with a spear, etc.. tiyeri.

the pubic hair full of lice of the female toucan flutters near me. mayepiriyoma pe no weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

pubic hair, lice. nomapi.

tree, plant. uhi.

your hands stink. wa imiki ni feweri.

to stink, to smell bad. heweri.

we are shooting arrows at him. pemakini pema a niyapraai.

we (I and them) are at war against them. kamiye yamakini yama pe niyapraai.

to have the habit of sharing someone. iyapraai.

to invite someone to come live nearby; to bring something closer. ahetaha.

visitors intensify the pain by trampling the ground. the pe nini kashuuhe.

pain that intensifies. kashuuhe.

at dawn they left, each one on their own, to kill curassows (from the result I realized that) their harpoon-tipped arrows had not missed the target. paruri pe nape ha huomopotuheni, pe the pe no kroshokroshoprao henaopereshi.

repetition of the act (of killing with a harpoon-tipped arrow). kroshokroshoprao.

food prepared with the wapu kohi fruit. wapurema.

resulta ahora que, mientras caminaban, hincaron la piedra grande perpendicularmente (en el suelo). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe (mit.

they hincaron (hincaron perpendicularmente) la piedra grande. pemakeherimahe.

to submerge a food completely in water, to cover a cooking food completely with water. shototopei.

I approached a wasp nest, and they emerged abruptly from the nest and I ran away. ya re ikuowei hami kopina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

to emerge suddenly; to gush out; to appear abruptly. presheai.

to make love with a woman (often very young) without penetrating her, rubbing the penis against her sex. tiketikemou.

the capuchin monkeys began to nibble their lower lip. hoashiri pe kasi wetiwetipraroma.

they began to nibble their lower lip. wetiwetipraroma.

in a place where the ground was bulging, there were manaka palms. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha manaka si pe kuoma.

convex, bulging, rounded. yeprihi.

you will be hungry like the others. wa kãi ohea ya hushuoripi kãi mitaohorou tarei.

you will be hungry like the others. mitaohorou.

to be wrinkled or crumpled in one place. ãpreteray.

I speak. opoporema ãhu.

I. ãhu.

he feels bad. he opikewemi.

to feel bad. opike.

large edible caterpillar (upriver dialect variant of . paharuma si.

the fish bite (= the fishing is good). yuri pe weio.

to bite (fish). weikei.

sticky, viscous. yãreke.

I am hungry. hiyomi mo.

to be hungry. hiyomi.

to be gloomy, dark. rumãhãwe.

to put oneself in a position to continue something. tikeprai.

to bend or curve the tip of an object in several places. toyekeakei.

to dishevel, to tousle (someone. poruk.

to approach a noise or voice. titetemakei.

to have been squeezed completely. ãhuhã.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. fãshãe.

(habla de río arriba. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. ): su hermano mayor, que se encuentra allí, si tan sólo pudiéramos vivir en hogares contiguos. ).

designates any woman older than Ego (masc. or fem.) with whom Ego has a consanguineous relationship: older sister, mother, mother. ami-.

what can be crushed and ground with the fingers. tihuamou.

they all started to work in the cultivated field. pe komi hikarimou shoaoma.

go get wood so I can burn (the field). koã ke ãsho ta yua, ya ﬁkarimou.

to work in the cultivated field. hikarimou.

to have said the truth habitually. ehetimorãyou.

to start having stomach cramps. kriiprou.

we approached and went down to the river. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

perfective aspect of an intransitive verb or middle voice verb. -praparu.

to make war. husu namo.

the sun declined over the horizon, then dusk came. the mothoka wai hiririoma, the mi weyarayoma.

to be near the horizon (a celestial body); to be at ground level. hiririoma.

(variant of a word from the south of the Orinoco river). hashi.

It is cold. puhi tikro.

to be cold. tikro.

to have eyes beginning to open (young animal). homo.

in the blink of an eye the váquiros went quickly downstream. yetu, kihami ware ke ki kuaai ha ropaikukirini.

they hurried to paint their bodies. yetu the pe yãrimoã re roparariyonowei.

to walk/do quickly. rope.

to begin to dry, harden, or smoke something. ãrokiprai.

the tree peels well. the si wario.

to peel. wario.

the women have already cried for the dead. suwe pe hushihipi hoyaa waikirayou kuhe.

they have cried for the dead. hushihipirayou.

to have a numb limb, to start feeling a tingling sensation. pote-.

1. Desplegar, es-. yãrãre.

Pokorariyoma's daughter searched the house during the others' absence (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and displace objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) in order to search for something underneath them. pokorariyoma.

they died. a nohi mohoturariyoma.

they died. mohoturariyo.

she left the mark of her passage through the corn field. kihami re mo siki yãrãruã thaa re shoareheriiwei.

to leave a mark on the vegetation when passing through it. yãrãrurei.

very tight (a knot, a bond, a union). ãkikiprawe.

I put the game meat in water (to cook it). yaro ya kããi.

to wash one's face. mi yãrimou.

to bathe, to soak, to macerate. yãrimo.

to pile up on top of each other. yayo.

to be numb with cold. kohipi.

two beautiful women have just arrived at the house. riyehewe ke kipi suwe kopei kuhe.

the high tobacco leaves are beautiful and abundant. hisihisi pee re nahe pata riyehewe yorukou thare.

beautiful, splendid. riyehea.

work in your turn. a ohotamo mi ta hetuiku.

wake up in your turn. a ta rãã mi hetuiku.

in turn, in one. hetuwe.

to have a new sprout, to have new feathers growing (still partially in their sheath). shipukutupiai.

they lie down together. mohe yoteai.

to lie down together. yoteai.

the door is misaligned (it cannot close correctly). yoka yokahawe.

not fit, be misaligned. yokahawe.

to scrape off (surface). hikekeai.

to scrape off the surface. hikeke-.

to smear with. kamiãi.

to shorten. onohãi.

edible fruit of the wakata hi tree. Simwakata.

plant family containing aroids. Araceae.

to go. ãrehe*we.

to the. al.

to make (someone) run. freremai.

the sipara kohi tree was not very large. sipara kuwetawe kohi wai kuoma.

give me a little. kuwetawe a ta hiyo.

1. Not very large, thin. 2. A little, not much.. kuwätawe.

to cause to have sores or rashes. sipiamai.

1. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tiresheprou.

they lay down on each side of him in a hammock. thoo ke thoku ha ke kipi parekea mi hetutua ha shoaikuni.

to be or place oneself on each side of a person (usually to eat). hetutuo.

do not move, stay still. a kuaatihe.

do not move, stay still. kuaatihe.

es necesario que cortes la palma de pijiguao. rasha wa si ha tuyereni.

suegro, debes agrandar el hueco. shoape wa the ka ha premarini.

I approached him (to kill him) at a moment when his wife was distracted. pe suwepi a wãri mohotutio totihio tehe ya prakea totihikeyoruma.

to approach quickly a person (usually to attack them). praketakei.

to become less dense, to become thinner, to clear up (low vegetation). takakaa.

he is hungry. ihirãma rootimi.

to be hungry. rootimi.

let's prepare a wapu drink crushed and mixed with water. wapu pehe the u ta tihua.

to mash and crush with the fingers (usually ripe cambures, to eat them as a puree). tihua.

(he/she) speaks. huheti.

to start producing shavings/chips. akaweshiprai.

the young people never stay still. huya the pe yãnikio ma re mai.

to calm down, to stop. yãnikiãi.

we discovered a paují perched and killed it. paruri yama a roa ha tararini yama a tharema.

perfective aspect. re.

to be affected by leishmaniasis. washepi.

they return on their steps. yapahou.

suddenly I found myself completely under the effect of yopo (lit. hisiomi ani yare shea re totihirehe.

yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi.

they did not enter (our house), they spent the night going around it. pe hanomi, pe ãyoãprarou he harutoma.

to go around, to circle. hanomi.

path that is rapidly invaded by vegetation. wãkeretou.

go to look for arrow canes at the limit of the cane thickets. fhe wetiki: pl.

1. To border, limit (a surface) 2. To kill (said during a ceremonial dialogue). wetikei.

to scratch the cavity that separates the toes by passing an object between them (a piece of wood, a cloth, etc.). kakekou.

to crush an object between two others. wakeamai.

passed in front of him and turned her back on him. a hayuparuni, a humapi reprou tehe nãroriwe.

passed in front of him. hayuparuni.

to place oneself suddenly in that way. waririprakei.

noises of insects and birds associated with the presence of a conuco. hikari theka heã.

noises associated with the presence of the hekura. hekura pe heã.

song of a gallineta (horãma) that indicates the proximity of váquiros. ware pe heã.

the noises that announced the conuco of Aparecido were heard immediately. pore re hikaripi theka heã kuo shoaoma (mit.

noise, signal (real or imaginary) associated with a place or creature; signal that announces the imminent appearance of the being to which it is associated. fheã.

bent in an arc like a raque-. raque-.

two beautiful women have just arrived at the house. riyehewe ke kipi suwe kopei kuhe.

the high tobacco leaves are beautiful and abundant. hisihisi pee re nahe pata riyehewe yorukou thare.

beautiful, splendid. riyehea.

show him immediately how to do it, if not he will have difficulties: "this is how you have to do it", tell him that immediately. a ta wea shoaki, a puhi wetinahamou tao: "e naha wa the thatape", wa e kuu ha shoaoni.

to show how to do something. thatape.

large nauseating mushrooms (of the yore species) sprouted inclined. yore pe pata kaihou shoaoma.

to sprout inclined, to lean, to tilt. kaihou.

null. fereremi.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe transformed. riye wãtetetaruni, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei (mit.

to narrow, to close (cavity, opening). wãteteãi.

to be iridescent, shimmering (continuous state). tererou.

to cause to crumble or pulverize (earth). waruhamai.

to return to live in the shapono (after having lived in a camp in the jungle). ãmopei.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age). eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

big. hãshimo.

Centipede carved Jaguar's feet and gave them shape. kumãrãwe ke ki wãrini, irariwe ke mamiki yakekerarema (mit.

to scrape the bottom of a container (generally with a gourd), to brush, to carve (to shape an object), to strike short blows with the edge of a tool, to produce shavings. yakekerarema.

to be congested, to have a stuffy nose. hokoã.

Shapokonayoma sat down next to me farting: "don't dirty my nose", I told him then. shapokonayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, shia keyeher o m a: "yare hiyokaki shamiãmai tikootihe", ya kutariyoma.

Shapokonayoma sat down next to me farting. Shapokonayoma.

to descend vertically (terminative aspect). wahohoprou.

camino que sube. fyo mi nono ã.

camino que sube. fyo mi nono.

pei. nahi thanoku.

pei. thanoku.

qué grande es el árbol que está aquí. kurahe eyeha re hi wai ta prepe.

big, large. prepe.

to have the habit of going to blow malefic substances to the members of a particular community. horapraai.

let's go there to knock down my pijiguaos with a stick. ipa rasha peheki ta rekeatu.

mine. rekeatu.

to doze off, fall asleep. he hererewe.

to doze off, fall asleep. herere.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw mucus). hushihipii.

a red variety of peach palm. wakewakerimi.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

to come here, to move towards here. ãweãwe.

we moved away as quickly as possible. yamaki rope sheyesheyemoherima.

we moved away as quickly as possible. sheyesheyemoherima.

to have that shape completely. wapokowe.

they immediately place the sticks in a line. hiki ithãã shaniniwe ta shoararihe she.

to be in a line, to be completely aligned. shaniniwe.

to be afraid. koeteyoma.

wait, I'll be back soon. waiha, ya huu koo haiowe.

soon, quickly. haiowe.

(in a ceremonial dialogue) to pour the crushed bones of a deceased male into gourds. ipa wa ãhuku he okãã totihitapema.

to pour the crushed bones of a deceased male into gourds. totihitapema.

The charo macho tree is tall. Wahara hi ã wãro ke.

charo macho tree; Helicostylis tomentosa (Moraceae). wahara hi.

to do this (stirring a liquid with a stick to remove something cooking) repeatedly. yakoretaai.

he had his big mouth open and his breath stank. the kahiki pata ha rereoni the mishiãki ni no wãi rishiwei kunomai.

to stink, to give off a foul odor. rishiwei.

my older brother comes towards me and lies down in my hammock made with lianas. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

hammock made with lianas. perikeyoruu.

"He managed to free himself", they said. "suwe a hukeprou tao", wa hore pu.

to become untied, to free oneself after having been immobilized by someone. hukeo.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

mixed. mezclados.

I said I would speak to him, although I'm not sure of his response. ya wã wapeprao poope, ya kuma ma re kui.

to dare to ask someone for something. wã wapai.

to quickly enlarge the surface area of a burn. hãrãretai.

I will hang the little deer in the hole of my earlobe (to carry it). kamiyeni pei ya yimikaki ha preãri ya wai huuai shoaowe.

hole/cavity of the earlobe. shoaowe.

he prevented his mother-in-law from sleeping (lit. pe yesi a miã shihihirimapoma.

the mother kept the daughter seated next to her. pe niini pe thee ke the hore tikemapou aheteoma.

to suspend something. fyauamai.

the pots are closed (by means of lids). hapoka si pe ka he kahuprawe.

closed, obstructed (plural objects). kahupraw.

al venir aquí hice un rodeo para evitar a la gente Arimawe. ãrimawe theri ke iha ya e ma re ãyoikiyohe.

no se les ocurra ir a atacar al anciano que vive en Arimawe. ãrimawe theri pata a wai re kui, a wãhã wayoai puhi topraotihehe.

a place name. ãrimawe.

poisonous snake, splendid [Bothrops sp. waro ke ki.

to become a poisonous snake, splendid. warishanare.

some reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

1. To reach the high part of a riverbank (the water of a flood). 2. To approach the shore, to navigate a canoe close to the riverbank. ihetete.

to provoke the healing of someone. yãnikipramai.

you all will believe falsely that you are valiant and stoic. waitheri ke wamaki hore puﬁope.

to believe falsely that one is valiant and stoic. puﬁope.

pus, suppuration. poupou.

"Come get us. "yamare ta koreyo. ", they shouted. ", pe komima.

Come get us!. koreyo!.

to make suffer, to make unhappy, to deprive someone of dignity; to give little, to disappoint someone. waikei.

to lie down on the ground. prapramou.

Baba had the habit of going to the forest to cook his bundles of caterpillars on the embers. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

to the forest/jungle. yaimoma.

the Waika dragged smoke into Yotenama's den to asphyxiate him. waika ke pe yotenama pe re yareiwehei.

to be dragged by the wind or an air displacement. yarekei.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to accompany food with another food. iyayo.

guamo caraota fruit. wãkãma.

to drink. weikai.

the wood is already hollowed out (by insects). hi si hororoprou waikirayoma.

to be hollowed out, to be full of holes (perfective of the inchoative verb . horororayou.

he conversed in a low voice. a wã wãhãniniwe wayoma.

to speak in a low voice, to emit a faint sound. wãhãnini.

in the site where they usually place their canoe on the shore. kanawa ke pe makepraai re totihio tharahei ha.

they killed the person whose son lives in another community (lit. ihi re ihirupi hoã wãri perihou ma re kui pe wãri sherema ha tharahei.

place, location, site. tharahei.

to be painted with a transverse line. oni hahetia.

to have been cut transversely at the end; to be painted or drawn with a transverse line. hahetia.

perfective of the durative (to break in that way). wahathorarei.

chipped, nicked. wetusi.

they must have made love, the fresh mark of their bodies is visible on the ground. ke kipi nami wãri kãi wamoma, heyeha the kipi nohori wãri tute praa.

mark, imprint, indentation left on the ground. nohori.

he never comes, he never arrives and also it can be The word 'nahe' in Yanomami means 'to have a desire'. pee nahe ha tihirutaarini, nahe humireno viene nunca.

never. nahe.

southern Orinoco dialect. yemota shi.

tomorrow I will work in the fields (downriver). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

The subject is doing something and moving towards a specific place simultaneously; often not towards the speaker or place of utterance, but the place is specified in the sentence. The sense implies that -ima is only used in imperfective sentences.. -ima.

Rabipelado glanced (towards the scene that was unfolding). nãroriwe the re mitareiwei.

to glance, to take a quick look. mitareiwei.

to be very tired. mohororopi.

Rana arched his back urinating to put out the fire. hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

arched his back. hiketeapraroma.

to bend, to twist. evb.

To smear oneself with it. V.

light gray clay. kroakroa.

I have the habit of entering through tree hollows and eating honey. k amiye pei ke ya ha rukeoproherini, ya upe waaprai tharei.

when the cassava is good to harvest, come down from the mountain (to eat them with us). nashi siki eteoprou tehe eyemi a mi ta wereparu.

indicates repetition of an action by one or more subjects at different times; can also denote a frequentative. -apra-.

he moaned. ihiru a re ãkãmiãmou.

moan. ãkãmiã.

soft earth that the crab has just removed from its hole. wii o k o na eyoshi.

I'm going to look for crabs. oko ya pe wai ta hupaheri sho.

crab. okona.

they were lying together in the same hammock, without anyone knowing. ke kipi yakao hãthooma.

lying together. hãthooma.

are you all painted and adorned. wamaki paushimoã haikiprariyo ta kuhawe.

to be about to go and get oneself adorned by another. paushipramou.

to disperse to do a search or hunt. rãkoko.

I feel like vomiting when I drink old water (lit. hote u peni ya kamishi yoruhou tharei.

(in all the places where we have lived) old tapir skulls remain on the ground (= they are the beasts that you have eaten thanks to me). shama pe hesi pata hote yapikiwe ma re kui.

old, used, deteriorated. hote.

to cook quickly a food (plantain, root or tuber), putting it directly on the fire. frãrãrããi.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to crush with the foot, to kick an object to destroy it (a semi-spherical object). katikiai.

to mess up someone. porukamai.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

he arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to follow behind, to walk behind. nohãmi.

¿por qué renunciaron a querer matarlos. weti ke wa the nape tuo.

why?. tuo?.

to clear. si tãihi.

Its succulent roots are edible. Pl.

plant cultivated, lairén; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). kumama.

to paint several circles on someone or something (perfective, plural object). tipikirarei.

due to that I gave them a basket of tobacco is that now they are chewing. pee ya nahe komi yorehi ha hipekini, nahe kareai ma ta kurawe.

tobacco. nahe*.

each time I lose my appetite. ya iyai mohitou si ihehewe.

appetite. iyai.

to walk leaning on a staff. hitheimo.

this onoto comes from the Waika, don't you see that it speaks like them. ei waika nana ke e nou, ei ke e nou ma re pashiomouwei.

to speak like the people from upriver, to speak with an accent, to speak a language that differs slightly from the local way of speaking. pashiomou.

he deposited the termite nest on the ground and tore it open with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

he tore it open with his hands. hureshekema.

to do it until the end, to realize everything. ya niaata el ﬁnal, realizarlo todo.

to do something completely, to realize everything. hodo.

a short time passed. yãhuyãhumai.

to pass a short time. yãhuyãhu.

to be externally of. ithorokowe.

noise produced by the vibrations of a taut string. pãopãomou.

two tails. horohopi shinakipi.

two, a pair; a small quantity. horohopi.

only a few were able to get out of the water quickly. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

1. to get out of a canoe, to set foot on land, to get out of the water; 2. to carry several objects from a canoe or water to land. washiriai.

mihi wake the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa (mit. mihi wake the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa (mit. ): those ripe fruits over there, give them to me for a moment so I can taste their flavor (lit. ): esos frutos maduros, allá, dámelos un momento para probar su sabor (lit. : so that I can taste them). : para que los pruebe).

give for a moment. hiprao.

black-billed monasa bird; Monasa atra (Bucconidae). It has a red beak.. yoreketirami.

we walked in a long extended line. yamaki shaiaherii.

to be walking in a line. shaiaherii.

he kept his mother-in-law awake (lit. pe yesi a miã shihihirimapoma.

to keep someone awake, to prevent someone from sleeping. shihihirimapoma.

when the day dawned, when the dawn began to break. pe the misi wakakaai tehe, wawetomi wapoko.

to be slightly open, to be slightly ajar. hoshoko.

to have a new sprout, to have new growing feathers (still partially in their sheath). shiputukupi.

plant taxonomy. makoarimi.

not to have goods for exchange. mãrokoprou.

bamboo arrowhead. wahotai.

one of the cries of the shaman. turiturimou.

I have felt well for a brief moment. totihoruhe.

es la razón por la cual él estaba enojado. ihi the nowã hã a hushuoma.

como estaba encinta, no podía andar rápido. a shipenapi the nowã hã a haipronomi (mit.

the reason for which, the cause of. hushuoma.

the two women walked covering their noses. suwe ke kipini hiyoka kahupraroma.

the two women covered their noses. hiyoka kahupraroma.

to cover/block one. kahupraroma.

the water began to boil. u yorupema.

began to boil. yorupema.

to produce many clusters. ikreheai.

to produce many clusters. ikrehe.

the effect of the malefic substance still greatly disturbs me. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

1. To fill completely, to fill to the brim. 2. To be greatly affected by the action of a magical substance. 3. To fill a container to the brim.. rahoai.

to become a Yanomami; to live, behave and speak like a Yanomami. yãnomãmiãi.

large (nauseating) mushrooms sprouted leaning. yore pe pata kaihou shoaoma (mit.

to lean, to incline. kaihai.

to have the voice that is changing (adolescent). paruripiprou.

on the shoulders and on the tail he placed a basket. pei hakoki hami, pei teshina ha yorehi ke e si kãi re shatimakeiwei.

placed, put on. shatimakei.

bejuco (unidentified vine/plant). shiporitama.

make the child come to the center of the group. ihiru a ta mi ãmopari.

to place someone in the center of a group or in the middle of the water. ãmomai.

to have painted round spots on someone or something by applying a ball of coloring moistened with saliva. hikikirarei.

do not go to attack the old man who lives in Arimawe. ãrimawe theri pata a wai re kui, a wãhã wayoai puhi topraotihehe.

do not go to attack. topraotihehe.

"as for you, it seems you have let two gallinetas escape", we said. "hãshimo wama kipi he oa ayamarei ta kuhani", yamaki kuma.

1. To let prey or an enemy escape. 2. To demonstrate a person. he omai.

do not inhale those leaves (= the leaves of those plants), they belong to the Yawari (if you inhale them) they will blow malefic substances over you. hena pe koai mai, yawari pe yããpi hena, kama peni wa thaprereihe.

they will blow malefic substances over you. thaprereihe.

there is a big turtle. totori ke pe pata praa.

exclamation of size or emphasis. praa!.

remain aligned for a moment. rãyoprao.

Horimawe has gone to sit on the path of the weyari, the healing trees will come to you. weyari pe no mãyo ha horimawe a roopariyoma horihori hiki niya re huope ye e.

healer that cures the sick. horimariwe.

the ketipa leaves tear easily. ketipa hena si sheaai si ihehewe.

to let something tear or break by negligence. sheaamai.

the edge or tip of a tool. koheprou.

pulsar, batir regularmente (como un corazón); sentir punzadas. yokoyokomou.

to become iridescent, shimmering. terere.

my brother-in-law sang all night to the hekura spirits. shoriwe a shaporimou he haruma.

to sing and dance like the hekura spirits, to transform into a hekura spirit after inhaling hallucinogens. shaporimou.

to cover an object or hide it behind something to prevent theft. shãhotai.

they descended again. desprawe.

the pijiguaos are already well ripe. ki wake eãhu waikiwe.

to be a little red, to be a little ripe. fwake.

he has killed repeatedly. a wãri ishooprou re kupiyei.

to attack or kill repeatedly. ishoprou.

he took the woman by the arm and made love to her silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to make love. mahitakini.

tobacco makes one lose strength. pee naheni the pe moyepitam a i.

to lose one. moe.

I have gotten blisters on my hand. ya imiki yotihirariyoma.

to get blisters. yotihiprou.

I will hunt, we (you and I) will eat game (lit. yaro ke ya niyãprai pehe a wape.

to shoot an arrow at a target, to kill with an arrow or gunshot. yãprai.

No translation available. pookokoku.

duerme en un chinchorro mugriento. yii ke ki tepepishi ha a perio.

to become dirty. tepepishiprou.

to crush insects by pressing them between the palms of the hands. hurukuprai.

to send to attack. shurukamai.

to scratch oneself with. tisikamou.

the souls arrived in a compact group to the dwelling. porepore ke pe warerou ha kuikiyoni.

in a compact mass composed of many elements. kuikiyoni.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. hirotoimi.

to become viscous or sticky (terminative aspect). yãrekeprou.

it was he who took her as a wife and deflowered her. ihini a ha tereni eyoshi ka thakei no kureshi.

vagina (jokingly). feyoshi.

1. Vine coiled into rings, placed around the ankles for climbing trees. 2. Package containing food intended to be cooked over the embers.. ãrohãroma.

while Jaguar climbed higher up the tree, his arms could less and less encircle the trunk (which became thicker and thicker). irariwe ke pokoku suriroherima (mit.

to climb a tree trunk that cannot be fully encircled by the arms, using a vine wrapped around the ankles. suriroherima.

to fall or slip like. tiikiprou.

to probe a makeukeu (a type of animal burrow in the southern Orinoco region); to spin rapidly between the hands. krohokrohomou.

I will go look for powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will make them rotate towards you. wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make something pivot or rotate. sha.

we slid towards them crouched down. ãkroto nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados.

to coil up, curl up. ãkrotoãi.

the women burst into laughter. suwe ke pe shoaproturou.

to make laugh a lot, to make burst into laughter. shoapramai.

to clean one's teeth with the tongue for a while. aka wamorem a i.

to clean one. wamorem.

they shot numerous arrows and the noise they made when falling was heard. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

noise produced by numerous arrows falling to the ground. thohuthohumorurei.

semen, urethra (woman). moupe.

not long ago they came to widen the entrance of the baba's burrow. iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

to widen the opening of a burrow by making the earth fall with a machete, bow or pointed stick. tishiakei.

to take, to remove. fuke.

to stain in several places; to set fires in separate places in the conuco. patihiai.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood close to each other, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

being close to each other. shirikirãyou.

to become weak, to become exhausted. he pahatoko.

to become weak, to become exhausted. pahatoko.

to come undone during cooking. rehihipei.

They had a rahara monster as a pet. rahara ke ki hiima pomahe.

He is already married. suwe a pou waikiwe.

They cut off the jaguar's head and took it home. ira he kãi peremahe, yahi hami he pomahe.

to have, possess, marry. po.

to have the urge to lay eggs. nathe ihe.

to have the urge to defecate. shi ihe.

to have the urge to, to want to (within specific expressions). keye.

don't start fighting with clubs again. naprushi peni a hore sheyou kopokirihe.

to start fighting with clubs. kopokirihe.

to wrap hastily or carelessly. hãrotai.

shawara: supernatural, cannibalistic beings, who are considered responsible for certain diseases and epidemics in general. shawara: seres sobrenaturales, caníbales, a los que se les considera responsables de ciertas enfermedades y epidemias en general.

supernatural, cannibalistic beings. shawara.

the cord of his hammock was about to break. pei pera the peki thapi fetii puﬁo yaro.

to carry, transport. pera.

we have passed the path where our enemies could pass (lit. pei ke yo nohimou mai pema yo nohãmipramarei ma re kuhe ke.

to pass, to leave behind. nohãmipramai.

mahi. pusipusi.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other. nonohokei.

to steal. thomiãi.

to become clear, limpid, translucent. erushiai.

the cambures (fruits) are crushed under the weight. tate ke ki nahihou.

to crumble, to fall apart, to break into pieces. kohihi.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

in. en.

the meat is tender. yaro a epehewe.

the bow is too flexible. hãto nahi a epehewe.

soft, tender, flexible. mou.

your hands stink. wa imiki ni feweri.

to stink, to smell bad. eweri.

the woman, who was coming out of isolation after her first menstruation, walked behind. suwe a shīhīhīrī huu prihãtou hooma.

to congregate, gather. shimo.

to have badly cut hair (after some time). wãrekewe.

1. To separate, plucking with the hand, the breast of a bird. 2. To peel green plantains or bananas with the hand.. krerokreromo.

I will soon beget a child. ya ihirupi thao ropaope.

I will soon beget a child. ropaope.

but, you (pl) do not inform us when the husband goes hunting. yamare wãri yimiraimi yaiwe tharomi a kotããi yaimou heama.

to inform, to notify, to warn. yimiraimi.

now they are returning to the collective dwelling. hei tehe the pe shimoo koã kupiyei.

to gather; to accumulate; to pile up. ihiye.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. reikimapou.

to start gathering, accumulating, or causing a slight inflammation. shimokoreprai.

to become inferior, to become shorter (in height, length, duration, value); to stay behind, to stay short of a limit. haweprou.

located outside the dwelling (temporary shelters). sipararithatrás.

to stop being straight, to bend, to curve, to become winding (often referring to an arrow). ethethai.

t h e r i y o m a: female member of a community. t h e r i y o m a: miembro femenino de una comunidad.

hoã tokurayoma: it seems a woman from Maheñito ran away. hoã tokurayoma: parece que una mujer de Maheñito se fugó.

woman. theriyoma.

I roast a cassava bread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

to roast, to cook in or on a container placed directly on the embers, to cook on a metal plate placed on the embers (usually a cassava bread). rãmi.

The matches provide comfort (thanks to them we can warm ourselves), they make sleep pleasant. pohoro hi re the pe ha the pe topramapou, pe the pe mimapou totihio.

to put someone in a certain state for them to have a good sleep. mimapou.

to mix, to blend. tikuruai.

to wave in front of oneself, while advancing, a handful of leafy branches, as if sweeping the floor, to reintegrate the noreshi of a sick person. yãhãromai.

I claim the goods, while the demons of dusk reject my hands. weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hãiihe tehe, ya ta nako sho.

Brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do we will jostle each other. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to jostle, push aside, reject someone. hãihãi.

lie down here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

to lie down for a while in opposite directions (with heads at opposite ends). yotetou.

to describe a rotational movement, to pivot. shimorerayou.

I leave the child in custody. ihiru ya heamai.

1. To leave someone in custody of an object, to entrust a child to someone. heamai.

he piled them up quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to pile up, to heap up. poshoshokei.

to have left something wet. heremararei.

it is approaching. the aheo.

to be in the process of approaching. aheo.

to be angry. kakeke.

Baba was short, he was of low stature. heweriwe hokatawe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi, yahatotowe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi (mit.

to be short, to be of low stature (a human being). ahatoto.

the cat with the spotted snout. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

the spotted-nosed cat. hayapishiwei.

como yo no dormía me mandaron (a hacer algo). ya mio no mai ha, ware a shimama.

mandaron, enviaron. shimama.

magic substance. kramosi.

the two claws of a crab. pei yorahepiki.

crab. yorahepiki.

to flap the wings. prathetheai.

it is flooded. shiri a.

to be flooded. shiri.

to become dull. wahotoai.

ya que tienes la costumbre de obtener pendientes de otros, mételos en el lóbulo de mis orejas (= ofréceme esas piezas metálicas). wa no hutukapi teapra ma kutaeni, hei pei ya yimikaki ha a ta huupari.

earring. huupari.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

to discern, see, distinguish clearly. hirahaprou.

(synonym for pee nahe yeri). tiri.

the foreigner killed one of ours. nape ke a wãri ishou kuhe.

he/she/it killed. kuhe.

to move along, to move along the side of something. rorokuãi.

to reflect. puhi kuu kãi perio.

1. (intransitive) for a bowstring to tighten by itself when wet; 2. (transitive) to tighten a bowstring by twisting it; 3. (state) for a bowstring to be tightened. hãto nahitha ereke.

to be angry. koukoumi.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the jungle. Õmawe y su hermano describieron una curva en la selva.

described. kipi.

then, what is happening to them (where they are). weti naha pei wamaki kuaai kupiyewe.

there, upriver, is where my garden plot is located. kiha ke ya hikaripi theka praa kupiyeheri.

to be in a certain state in a place different from the place of utterance. -piyew.

to separate a banana shoot from the mother plant for transplanting. kuratha si tikareai.

to separate. tikareai.

my two older brothers ate it. ãiwe ke kipini the wapirema.

they two ate it. wapirema.

1. To advance for a moment (animal). 2. To move briefly crawling (small child).. tereketou.

Tucán utilizó afrodisíaco y así transformó la mente de la mujer (para seducirla y llevársela a su casa). mayepirithaweni a ha kumireni suwe ke a puhipe yai tharariyoma.

transformed the mind. kumireni.

to run across a footbridge over a stream. rerepariyo.

tuvo que pasar mucho tiempo antes de que el suelo recuperara la firmeza, entonces ellos descendieron nuevamente. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma.

to become firm, to recover strength. hiyakou.

ant. resi.

I want to go there. ya no hurayopi.

I want to go there. hurayopi.

the one who habitually brings us fruits. el que nos trae habitualmente frutos.

brings. trae.

Hija mía, apresúrate a ir a darle de comer a tu esposo (ubicado enfrente). oãsimi heãrohe nii e ki wai hipea ta haikuhuru.

kupohorurei : allá hay un nido de abejas (lo descubrí hace tiempo). kiha puu a kua cimos salir a todos al llegar.

to do upon arriving. -rayou.

you used to come back with your back bent from the weight of the food. wa ki niipi kãi hute terekeprou tharei.

to bend over from a heavy load, to bend the back, to become able to crawl (stage of child growth). terekeprou.

to make someone worried or restless. horipramai.

mientras trepaba a lo largo del tronco, Pájaro carpintero se detuvo en diferentes puntos. eshãmiriwe ke a yeteatarou kuaaherima.

Pájaro carpintero buscó luego dirigiendo la mirada en esa dirección. eshãmiriwe kihami ke a mamo huprou piyekoma.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

Pájaro carpintero (a mythological ancestor). eshãmiriwe.

they were following the tracks. pe mãyo nosi teaprarai kuaamahe.

they were following/pursuing. kuaamahe.

the morada of Yotenama had become silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

what terrible voice is that. weti the ã no kiria kurawe.

sound, noise. kahiki*.

walk in a long line (in silence). ponerkuni.

to start squeezing or pressing something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand. ãhuhuprai.

he turns his head. he aharaai.

to turn one. aharaai.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with plant residues, to be contaminated with plant residues (drinking water), to be covered with dry leaves. heshãheshãpiãi.

I placed sticks under the ugly buttocks of the (unborn) child, and Rumirumiyoma wove a basket to enclose it (= I killed the fetus in the mother's womb). kana ke hiki ha ihiru ya posi wãritiwe romaparei kurei, rumirumiyoma ihiru pei ke a pesi ha tiyeaprani.

a female spirit associated with cloudy weather and rain; she is the mother-in-law of Titiri, the demon of the night. Rumirumiyoma.

to be hungry. yotete.

hot, warm. omoki.

they did not enter (our house), they passed the night going around it. pe hanomi, pe ãyoãprarou he harutoma.

to pass the night going around. harutoma.

used for magic. aroari keki, ihiru keki, koãmashi keki.

snake, worm, caterpillar. keki.

to fluidify, to make less dense. hereshikei.

to squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to extract the juice of a fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held with the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. ãhuhuãi.

the woman came to my house. kamiye re ya yãnopi ha the u kãi mãu taproyoma.

the woman came to my house. taproyoma.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something in the vicinity of a dwelling. hewemapei.

syn. sin. hii theri therimi: set of beings (humans, supernatural beings, animals or plants) associated with a particular object or environment. hii theri therimi: conjunto de seres (humanos, seres sobrela naturales, animales o plantas) asociados a un objo o medio determinado.

fmaa ma t h e r i m i: hekura that live in the rocks. fmaa ma t h e r i m i: hekura que habitan en las rocas.

pookosi fyahi therimi: set of members of nearby communities born by fission from the same original local group. pookosi fyahi therimi: conjunto de miembros de comunidades cercanas nacidas por ﬁsión de un mismo grupo local original.

community. therimi.

Broth from cooking meat. Yaro pei ke pouku.

broth from cooking (game, fish, etc.). pouku.

to have been completely painted with transverse lines. iprutuprou.

Give fish to my younger brother, whom we ask to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

When they sit next to each other, they have to make you sit in the center. the pe roo yehihimou tehe, mi ãmo ha ke wa kãi romapouhe.

to hang, to suspend oneself. yauai.

rounded and short (an object). krãkãhewe: redondeado y corto (un objeto).

rounded and short. krãkãhe.

there the Yanomami place themselves on both sides of the herd of tapirs and shoot arrows at them. kihami ware ke ki ha yãnoãmi the ki hore shekiamou yakaroai mapei ha.

to straddle, to be or put astride. yakaroo.

the chicken ran with wings extended. kakara ihirupi hehewe a rereapraroma.

ran with wings extended. rereapraroma.

to burn the interior of a canoe to produce the separation of the edges. hithotheprai.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood erect, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

where rocks stand erect close together. shirikiope.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). pakatarimi.

to have erect and firm breasts. fhãkãmiki shererewe.

the two breasts of the same person. fhãkãmiki.

to place oneself suddenly in that way. waririprakei.

he took down the basket abruptly and carried away in it the living child. wii ke a pata ha hayutareni, ai ke a temi re titireheriiwei.

to carry an object contained within another. titireherii.

to sink, to crumble, to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihomai.

acaso no hirieron a mi yerno (lit. nahi ma re wãriãprahihahei.

son-in-law. hekama.

this bow is not made as it should be. dishi iyomamou totihitawe ke a thai.

bow. dishi.

crouch over there, I crouch over here. miha ke a ta yereiku, kiha kamiye ke ya yereo.

to crouch or be crouched, to be or get against the ground (with limbs gathered), to perch or be perched on the ground with legs gathered (a bird). yerekei.

not. pahatea.

that which can be. hikeamou.

to open, to crack, to separate (the edges of an elongated object). hãthoãi.

the plant of the birds of prey occupies a wide surface. koikoimi henaki pata re upraa re yaweterakiri ye.

occupying a wide surface. yaweterakiri.

to grow poorly, to grow sparsely. mashishipiai.

water. urerai.

I don't have a tobacco quid under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a tobacco quid under the upper lip. nosinosi.

I hurry to look for my bark hammock. yãri natha siki nape kãi wãri re yekeiwei.

bark of the yãri natha shrub. yãri natha.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to have accompanied (a food with another). tehiarei.

they went back to their houses and ate there. the pe kooprou ha kooni yaro pe ha pe iyama.

to return home, to go back. kooni.

to tie, to bind tightly with a knot or very tight loop. prohohokei.

speech of upriver. fesikakiwe.

Daughter, beware of the quicksand, it attracts people so that you and your husband can gather pijiguaos for me. heãrohe sho rashaye ke ki ta yuapi: hija, valos terrenos movedizos, atrae a las personas hayan tú y tu marido a recoger pijiguaos para mí.

The demon of the quicksand dragged him into the depths of its pit. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei (mit.

The master of the quicksands approached me (with a certain purpose). heãhãturiweni ware nape rii shurukou kuprei.

demonio maligno de la clase yai the asociado a los terrenos movedizos, atrae a las personas hacia el fondo de la cavidad cenagosa que él habita. heãhãturiwe.

he gathered fruits and let them fall. ﬁmoﬁmo a ha keprarini a kemarema.

to drop, let fall. ﬁmoﬁmo.

the mother quickly uncovered the child's hair to look for lice. pe niini yipi ke the henaki hapreshetarema.

to uncover, reveal. hapreshe.

you (pl. wamaki mi waitheri nonoomi.

to be a coward. nonoomi.

say that to deceive. wa nomohori ha kuni.

to invite someone under false pretenses in order to kill them or take their women. omohorirei.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the rear part of a canoe; to walk behind. korokei.

when I was little, they made my speech die (lit. peni yare ã oshe kashuu nomamahe.

to make die. nomamahe.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

its. su.

to place directly over the fire (without hanging it). irerepei.

I learn the songs (or words) of the Shamathari, you will not retain them. kihi a re shamatharirati ya wã rii ha teaprani, kafeni wa wã titipou mrai ke the.

to not retain, to not learn (a song, ceremonial speech passage). kafeni.

to dent in several places. wãukupramai.

to pry apart, to lift something using a long pointed object as a lever. iyoreai.

you, the young ones, go hunt animals, kill prey. ihiru pe, miha yaroye ke a ta thahe, posheye ke a ta niyaprahe.

to kill animals for hunting. niyaprahe.

¿y si yo lo transvaso a otra olla. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to pour, to decant. heikei.

Scrape it quickly with the machete. siparani wa the ha horerehorereprarini.

to scrape, rub, or clean something using the edge of something (like a knife or machete blade); to clean or scrape something with the folded part of a split vine held between the hands. horereãi.

being curved and raised (a normally flat object). yotataprou.

being curved and raised (a normally flat object). yotataprou.

to grow, to rise. tireprou.

they climbed (the mountain) and, while climbing, Kasima felt dizzy. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a V.

to climb, to ascend. yãmothema.

(sound of striking wood). krehe.

sound produced by a wooden object when struck. krehe.

to open (an object). pawehe.

to collide, hit (once). tihekio.

it took little time for the turtle's head to suddenly droop (from illness). poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni.

to be gravely ill. reipraikuni.

they pursued me in vain in this place, they were tensing their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

they pursued me in vain. poimamahe.

to express oneself using a. kahira.

who (participates) also. weti sho.

my son, who are you in love with. oãsi weti sho ke waheki nohimayou.

also, too, as well. sho.

to become concave (surface). hopokou.

I have given them all. ya the pe hititikema.

I have given them all. hititikema.

he had crushed a guaritoto plant against the ground. api ke nasiki wai raipraama kurahari.

to crush, to flatten. u*.

the man was in the middle of many termites that were piled up inside the hammocks hung close together. osheri ke pe yayomope hami yãnomãmi ke the re nikerepariyonowei.

to be crowded together, piled up. yayomope.

to have developed white spots on the body (probably due to a fungal infection). yoapirayou.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

I speak frankly, not hiding what I think. hoyãomi.

the bats ate all the cambures during the night (the speaker discovers that his plants are destroyed). hewe peni raparimi ki mi wathea harurema sihei.

they ate. harurema.

to shake (a wet animal, a dog). yomisiprou.

to start piling up, to start gathering. poshoshoprai.

let's go several (people). pe ta pakihipraruheri.

go several (people). pakihipraruheri.

in all the points of the trees against which he had rubbed his bloodied penis, transverse stains were seen. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to rub against, to clean, to wipe, to erase by rubbing with the hand or with a pointed object; to dirty or stain an object by rubbing or applying another. hãhii.

suwe pata: old woman. suwe pata: mujer vieja.

abandoned dwelling. fyãno suwe pata.

old woman. suwe pata.

a type of tree. kathohi.

estar moribundo (to be dying). no kuwemi.

to be dying, to be moribund. uwemi.

to renounce. ãkiki.

to make round, spherical. komoreãmestible.

drink. a ta koari.

drink. koari.

to have a stained face. mi ishi.

to have a stained face. mi ishi.

to partially split the end of a long object to make it forked. pakarakei.

to end abruptly. foroko.

He was carrying the package on his back. cargaba el paquete sobre la espalda.

to carry on the back. reke.

let's prepare a wapu drink crushed and mixed with water. wapu pehe the u ta tihua.

to mash and crush with the fingers (usually ripe cambures, to eat them as a puree). tihua.

to become dense (vegetation); to become obstructed. paimiprou.

the váquiros forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

to force. wãre.

it is in the basket. wii hami the titia.

to be placed in a cavity. titia.

They (two) spread epidemics over a vast region. no wãri a aka praukumapii shoaoma.

to widen, expand, become spacious. hauhu.

Why is it that the chiggers always come to lodge under the toes. weti the ha hihu na peni yare mamisi pe no hore waiaprai ayao.

It is him whom I decided to kill. ya waiamar e m a.

1. To persist; to pursue. 2. To refuse, to prohibit (e.g., telling a child not to eat a forbidden meat, telling someone not to come back, asking someone to refuse to accept something). 3. To choose a victim (human or animal predator).. waiamarei.

those who are no longer (the deceased). fpe re maomopotuhe.

the deceased. fpe.

tree; Pourouma sp. (Cecropiaceae). yãokorema.

to hurry to go. rekesa.

the (cut off) woman's head accompanied the husband rolling. pe heãropi ke ihami pei ke the he pruruu nosi yauai yaioma.

to follow, accompany someone in a movement. yaurei.

To wear out. waruhuai.

as I am attentive (I asked) that they grate cassava (and make casabe) for my father-in-law who lives downstream and is hungry. ya puhi ha taoni, hei koro hami, hei shoaye a hoã ohiri re peripiyei.

behave (small child). peripiyei.

it is still new. a tute shoawe.

not long ago they came to enlarge the cave of the babilla (to reach it and kill it). iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

Here is a wad of tobacco, a wad prepared not long ago. pee nahe tute, pee ke nahe tute totihiwe.

recent, new. tuto.

he swelled up (from the water he had drunk). mãuuni a thororoprariyoma.

he swelled up. thororoprariyoma.

to begin to exchange, to start exchanging. nomihiprai.

a beast usually lies in ambush here nearby, there is a beast ambushed. yaro a yetekou re ahetoimi, yaro a re yetek o p i y e i.

we left the palm grove behind, and then we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to be ambushed, to lie in ambush. yetekou.

my scalp hurts because of the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to experience a painful sensation due to a superficial injury (an irritation, a tear of the skin, a burn, a blister, etc.). hushii.

the wind makes the palms buzz. masiko ke ki shiririmou.

to buzz, to hum. maa*.

malefic demons opened his chest. yai theni a pariki kakaprarema.

they opened (his) chest. kakaprarema.

my daughter's face is so beautiful. shetemi a puhi riyeheo totihio tharea.

beautiful. tharea.

the night surprised them, and the noises of the darkness were heard. yetu ke the pe he itututou ha yaironi, titiri pe heã kuprou shoarayoma.

to have closed (a basket) by joining the opposite edges and tying them together. itutupei.

the woman who breastfed him/her (when he/she was little). a re shatiowei.

the woman who breastfed him/her (when he/she was little). shatiowei.

supernatural being associated with lightning. thãhirãmi.

cannibal. ferãmi.

to make war. tishikã.

would you have the courage to challenge me, urging me to carry out my threats. kamiye re iha waheki he wãri hore ou thawe. (ceremonial dialogue). (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to challenge a person by urging them to carry out a threat they have made. he ou.

the baby does not let others hold it. ihiru a noshi imão.

he will not agree to send the woman to have sex. suwe a noshi imãrei.

to reject advances from men (for a woman); to not let strangers hold (for a baby). imão.

bully. paretomi.

she transformed into a guabina fish. a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

she transformed into a guabina fish. ishawaritomiprariyoma.

Rabipelado advanced hiding behind the trees. nãroriwe hii ke hi pe hami a wãri hiririãpraroma (mit.

to lie along, to lean against (an elongated object). hiririo.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

1. to separate a portion of meat by breaking it off with the hand, in order to offer it; to take a bit of tobacco from one. hakoko.

I did not eat much honey, I was dipping something in it for a moment to eat it and then someone called me to go. puu ya u pe wai he ononoo mai, wãisipi ya the wai ha otoototaakini, ai theni yare nakama.

to dip a food in a liquid quickly to eat it. otootomai.

it kept raining. maa ke pe keoproma.

to keep raining. keoproma.

to lie side by side, in the same direction, in a hammock. eshãmi.

to pretend that one does not know who is guilty of a harm. mohotumorayou.

due to them not wanting to desist, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to desist, to give up. tirataai.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. kihami ya koketayoma pei maki hami ya peria nareatayoa.

I live with the others on the rock. nareatayoa.

became scarce. resheshãrayou.

ant. Pheidole.

to lean against an elongated object for a moment. hirikit.

to be partially hardened or deformed. prihãã.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). wãwã.

to protect oneself by placing branches or palm leaves around the shelter one inhabits. hikoromou.

to protect, to surround with a defensive fence. koro.

he has constructed his temporary shelter along the path of Siroromi. siroromi a no mayo hayuope ha a peria ha reparuni.

to construct a temporary shelter along the path. hayuope.

to roll up or fold over repeatedly, to fold the edge of an object several times. wapuremai.

to make back-and-forth trips (on the same route). yapayapamou.

to be disconcerted, stunned; to be helpless. horihipramai.

when you collected the bones of the cremated dead, did you carefully search (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

1. to flee, take refuge in dense vegetation; 2. to search for an object mixed among others, to search for scattered or intermingled fragments. proruruprou.

the moriche fruits take on a slightly yellowish color when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to take on that color (of the eteweshi fruit). okoroshiãi.

to bend, to curve (perfective, plural object). hithoreakei.

driguera haciendo girar rápidamente entre las. yori haciendo girar rápidamente entre las.

driguera. yori.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age). eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

love. wamou.

I'm going with the others to fetch water. mãu ya u ta ishakomai nareo sho.

the entire vine forms a hook. thoo thotho ishakowe.

bent branch. fhii poko tishakoa.

to curve into a hook shape, to bend into an arc. ishakoai.

to make exit or enter, to give birth, to sprout. fa.

he has covered his head with white down feathers. he horoimamorayou.

he has refused to give away his possessions. shi imamorayou.

to have done something (perfective). imamorayou.

kamonene: bot. kamonene: bot. , aquatic plant (unidentified (animal, plant)). , planta acuática (no identificado (animal, planta)).

aquatic plant (unidentified). kamonene.

to be a little long, a little loose. preyukuhu.

Translation:. kaihiti natohi.

divididive montañero; Cassia multijuga (Leg., Caesalpiniaceae). natohi.

he took off the blade fragment with handle that he was wearing around his neck, and put it on the ground. haoa a re hayuprareiwei, a wai ha prakini.

he took off (an object) that was hanging around his neck. hayuprareiwei.

con esos bambúes inclinados haré puntas de flecha. pe ihirupi a suhaaiyepe ka ha tharini.

puntas de flecha. suhaaiyepe.

to descend vertically (perfective). wahohorayou.

in a place where water was heard flowing underneath him, from his feet, he pierced the earth with his bow. e naha motu re u pata shararamou re pepianowei ha, hãto nahini u hiwehama.

to be below, to be underneath. pepianowei.

not to sleep during the night. fmamo he wakarai.

at dawn Rabipelado left the collective dwelling. nãro re a horeprarou he wakarai yaioma (mit.

to stay up until dawn, to do something until dawn. wakarar.

to tense the string of a bow by twisting it on itself. hãto nahitha erekeai.

to tense the string of a bow by twisting it on itself. hãto nahitha ereke.

I am worn out from pain. yã mi no hore re wayuhi thawei.

to be battered, to be worn out. wayuhi.

to bathe, to wash oneself. aumou.

when a hunter kills one of those birds, he has to undergo the ritual of homicides (u n okaimou). cuando un cazador mata a uno de esos pájaros, tiene que someterse al ritual de los homicidas (u n okaimou).

ritual of homicides. unokaimou.

others had placed the horizontal rods at the back of the future dwelling. ai peni nahi pe hehã theikema.

to place horizontal rods at the back of a future dwelling. theikema.

to go to extract something using a utensil. hiketaai.

you are not going to divide what belongs to me. matohiye wama pe no shererai ma re mai.

to divide, separate into parts. matohiye.

bruscamente, él puso la mano sobre las hojas inclinadas. h enaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to have the hand placed on something. warikei.

current of water. wiririai.

to force something in, to slide something between the skin and the loincloth (to hide it, to transport it). hikokei.

to extend (a flexible thing), to stretch a liana between two banks to cross a stream. fririhimakei.

to allow someone, to whom a canoe has been lent, to leave it in the place they choose. kanawa kãtãmãpou.

to allow someone to leave a borrowed canoe wherever they choose. kãtãmãpou.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their extremities damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be damaged, to be crushed (extremity of a long object). thekehãi.

los hekura matarán un jaguar. ama ikoto a prapou yaiopehe (cha.

jaguar. yaiopehe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). ihororomi.

to soften several objects. fepehamai.

null. yoararomi.

to be decorated with a pattern of two crossed lines. yãhiriã.

to widen progressively towards the edge the wall of an object while making it (canoe, vessel, basket, etc.). ehetekei.

to separate a portion of meat by breaking it off with the hand, to offer it; to take a bit of tobacco from one. hakoka.

my younger brother engendered it (= my younger brother is its father). aiyeni ke a tararema.

to engender, to procreate. tarare.

to recover consciousness. mi yaitha.

to recover consciousness after being under the influence of a strong hallucinogen; to free oneself after being possessed by a supernatural being; to become human. yaitha.

it is hooked. mi thorukua.

to be hooked. thorukua.

to appear (after). waeheai.

to lean against an elongated object. hirikikei.

both set out at dawn. ke kipi harika shurukua henarayoma.

at dawn, at the beginning of the day. harika tehe.

morning, dawn, beginning of the day. harika.

I am sharpening a bamboo point. ahaka ya kopemai.

to sharpen, to shape into a point. kopeprou.

the yawari shot arrows at the toucans, one of them got stuck (in a tree). yawari peni mayepi e pehi niyakemahe, shereka e shatikema.

Mount Maiyo rose again, very visibly. maiyo ke ki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini (mit.

to be fixed perpendicularly, to penetrate inside, to be embedded; to rise (mountain). shatikema.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko.

chisel or burin made with a wooden handle and an incisor of the peccary. thenaki.

they died one after another. nomaoprou.

to die one after another. nomaoprou.

I got sick from the grease of the cajaro. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not completely in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, I imagine very distant things (lit. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

substance (hallucinogenic, tobacco, food, etc.); to lose one. kaharo.

the thin (old) woman was crouched in her hammock. poreporeyoma ke te wãri tureketaoma, the wãri puushitaoma.

thin (old) woman. poreporeyoma.

banana plant about to flower (lit: pubescent banana plant). kuratha si moko.

pubescent. moko.

We are hekura with bead necklaces around our chests, and we go towards you. tope u harehatimi yamaki te huope ye.

necklace. huope.

to clean an object; to make white, to paint or color white. aushiprai.

as this region is infested with shawara, you have a headache (lit. hei shawarari ke hiki ha wa heki okãã ta kupoka.

to have a headache (lit. to have a band of bark or vines around your head). kupoka.

he/she peeked. mi yehekei.

don't look at others while hiding. a mi yeheatihe.

to peek, to spy, to observe stealthily. yehekei.

I am afraid. wãrãshãã ke ki.

to be afraid. wãrãshãã.

to flatten. make-.

that which is yellow or brown (referring to the blue macaw and the red-rumped curassow, whose ventral feathers are brown, to distinguish them from the paruri, which has white ventral feathers). ashiashirimi.

that which is yellow or brown. -rimi.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to start lifting and moving objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. hãshãeprai.

stagnant water covered with a film, probably due to the activity of bacteria or other microorganisms. hererepiprou.

the breath of the Yanomami reaches us when the horãma birds sing. yãnomãmi pei the pe mishiã waroo horãma pe wãhai tehe.

breath, breathing; the vital breath. wãhai.

it rains very hard. fmaa a sutaai.

to rain heavily. sutaai.

plants. nathosiki.

the woman was truly pregnant. suwe a shipenaa ha yairini.

the woman was pregnant and could not go fast. suwe ke a shipenapi yaro a haiprou maoma.

to be pregnant. shipenaa.

they did not do as you did, they were not lazy like you. kahe ke wa owemama.

to imitate, to do the same as. owemama.

older brother, roast a green plantain to accompany the piapoco meat. ãi, mayepi a tehi ta yapa.

to accompany food (generally, but not always, a game or fish prey). tehimi.

don't suspect me (= don't believe that about me). yare nohi thapotihe.

to suspect, to believe, to think something about someone. toanowehei.

to repair an arrowhead made of bamboo (if it was damaged by an impact). thetar.

the crested curassow's crest is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to be bristled (feathers or fur of an animal). mãririã.

I am the song of the Yoreshiãmi Spirit that passes before you. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope e.

bird; Monasa sp. (Bucconidae). yoreshiãmi.

none of us found anything. yamaki no pruka pahateanomi.

to not obtain any result during a search, to work uselessly, to waste time. no pahatea.

from the interior of a hole. taroprou.

to be locally reddened by the action of the sun (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). heteterayou.

to sit in the water with legs open. rehehetou.

to do it quickly, to do it for a moment. wãkitai.

gather. amai.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while observing the surroundings (when an attack is feared). fkohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; for birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. yãpreke.

to crack one's fingers. fehethaki utuo.

finger. fehethaki.

to place at a good distance (neither too close nor too far), to bring closer what is too far away, to move away what is too close. ayekeamai.

to be locally reddened by the sun (durative 2). hetetou.

he was brushing against the two women who were walking with their arms around each other's shoulders. suwe ke kipi ipihiaprarope hami a pakihiapraroma.

to be hanging from the shoulder. ipihou.

others, stiff from death, began to float slowly on the water. ai nomawe ke the pe kasheshewe opi pokeai kuaama.

he made a rigid and straight woven tail with it. kasheshewe yorehi si tuyeprai shoarayoma, a teshina thakema.

to be completely rigid, stiff or straight; to be rigid (a corpse). kasheshewe.

to have become wide, large, extended (in surface area). hauhurayou.

he hid out of fear of the dangerous thing. kirikiri pe wayu ha a hitheoma.

dangerous, potent hallucinogen. kirikiri.

(he/she) speaks upriver. shiporokoma sitho.

to speak. hapa.

to climb rapidly. hiwara.

to be hungry. toumo.

the different songs succeed one another. ãmoã ke pe notiatarai tharahei.

to succeed one another. notiatarai.

he followed another path. ai yo nosi tea re mahireheriiw e i.

followed another path. mahireheriiw.

eyelash. mathomatho.

the small stream of water becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to end abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horokokei.

they will follow one another to go around the exterior, in this way they will have fun. sipo ha wamaki ha ãyopraani pe ta iriamo.

to place around, to surround. ãyoyo.

supernatural being, hekura associated with cold, darkness and storm clouds. ruweriwe.

two guayucos have been put one next to the other. porakapi wayuko ke kipi herurua.

to put two objects together. ruyutu.

unfortunately. yaimahe.

to be very angry. pohopohomo.

my younger brother. hepayu.

object that has been burned. hisika no.

shrub; Tabernaemontana heterophylla. ãshãkãma.

bot. oroshomi thotho.

small gourds in which the ashes of the dead are sometimes kept. oroshomi.

to be barely dark. ruwehehe.

to be numb with cold. kohipi.

to refuse to accept a gift, an object, a portion of food. waii.

1. waio.

to refuse to accept a gift, object, or portion of food. wai.

both crabs are side by side (in the same hole). oko ke kipi hãkohoã.

to be juxtaposed, to be side by side (round objects); to be two in the same hammock. hãkohoã.

to be satiated. potehou.

to be straight, correct, right. ihita.

there is a bee nest (that has honey) stuck to the trunk of a still small motua tree. kiha oi ke pe yetea kupiyerei, motua oshetiwe ke hi ha.

to be ambushed, to be stuck to. yetekewe.

I was convinced that a snake was going to bite me and I walked with apprehension. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to walk with apprehension. haruapraroma.

when (he/she/it) arrived at a certain height, they made the trunk swell up. peshekutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

when (he/she/it) arrived at a certain height. peshekutohorayou.

to have lost its skin/bark. ukukurariyo.

wing bones of a bird. hãrãrãmãpi.

defect of an arrow that tends to spin when shot. yãweyãwewe.

they went to kill the effigy. no owe ke a re shei herahe.

they confused an otter with a babilla and struck it with the tips of their bows: "it's the effigy of our enemies. proro a ma kui ha, iwa a hore ha puhiheni, a tiwehamahe: "ihi re a no wãri owe e. ", they said. ".

effigy. herahe.

"It's slippery. "pe the takre. ", declared Wãrishewe. ", wãrishewe ke a wãri kuatarou yaioma.

a mythological figure who declared something was slippery. Wãrishewe.

tomorrow I will work in the fields (downriver). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

The subject is doing something and moving towards a specific place simultaneously; often not towards the speaker or place of utterance, but the place is specified in the sentence. The sense implies that -ima is only used in imperfective sentences.. -ima.

he went upriver in a canoe until here, to harvest wild fruits. kanawa ke a ha the pe pehi kãi mi ha yãmoimani, the pe ni thaoma.

to harvest wild fruits. thaoma.

rodents like rats and mice smell bad/begin to rot. thopode roedores como las ratas y los ratones.

to smell bad, to begin to rot (meat). thopode.

to scream in pain. wãno wayuprou.

to scream in pain. wayuprou.

the water of the flood was not rushing, it was approaching slowly. motu ke u hainomi, opisi u owema.

to approach, to get close. owema.

if you move around making noise like that, the humans will hear you and shoot arrows at you. minaha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

in this way, in this manner. hirirei.

the conucos are far away, downstream. theka praa korotaa kure.

to be far away, downstream. korotaa.

to crush by pressing. huthemiprai.

to crush by pressing. huthemi.

(no clear translation). rohotho.

the plumes of the crested curassow surround the base of its arpoon points, observe them well. ãyokoro hami pe no ikimoipi ãyoyowe no ta tare she.

the base of its arpoon points. ikimoipi.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to drop significantly before going to kill fish in it. thookorou.

(antonym of aka porepiai). aka hayu.

come children, stand in the central plaza. ihiru pe, pe ta hehãtaru, pei hapohe.

to stand in the central plaza. hehãtaru.

the earthen wall that blocks the burrow of the waraima lizard. waraima akatho heporashi.

inflorescence of certain grasses (corn, arrow cane). heporashi.

the cannibalistic hunger of Jaguar awoke when he ate the placentas of the newborns. ihiru re pe nosikini ira a naiki shurukoma.

cannibalistic hunger. nosikini.

to become constipated (terminative aspect). hokoprou.

father-in-law, here is the honey (of the mashipuma species). shoapemi, hei mashipuma ke a kua kure.

father-in-law (vocative). shoapemi.

to shoot harmful substances by blowing a blowgun. protho.

to raise a daughter, to make her grow; to wait for a girl to be pubescent (to marry her, to consummate a union, etc.). mokomai.

I laid the child down. ihiru ya perimakema.

to lay something down, to make something lie down. perimakema.

to strangle. forãmi hiyãi.

to strangle. hiyãi.

faint sound of an engine. motoro ke ãmomiã.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma (mit.

faint noise, barely perceptible sound; echo. ãmomiã.

Espíritu-luna se elevaba, y las flechas no llegaban hasta él. periporiwe a ha isirini pe shereka hawepraai yaioma (mit.

to elevate, grow, sprout (perfective form). isirayou.

you will not have me killed by the hekura. yare pesi yehiai mai ke the (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to be killed by a hekura (during a ceremonial dialogue). fpesi.

I crushed the wasp between my fingers. kopina ya na hutikiprarema.

to crush between the fingers (sliding one against the other). hutikiprai.

to become numerous. yaharaai.

I am sleepy. ya maharishi waikiwe.

little one, have you woken up. pusi, wa maharishi mraa waikirayou.

to sleep, to have sleepiness. maha-.

sound produced by a wooden object when it is struck several times at regular intervals. tããmo.

to sharpen (something). namo ishori.

to sharpen, make sharp. ishori.

he sharpened the tip of his club a lot. himo ora ke a namo thai preyukua.

to sharpen, to make the tip of an object very sharp. preyukuakei.

Dormilona se pintaba el cuerpo detrás de un gran árbol. hii ke hi pata ãyori ha wathaperariwe a yãmoma.

to paint, to color. yãmoma.

to make faces, to clown around. fwãrihotho thai.

to make faces, to clown around. fwãrihotho.

fabricate an oblong object. toroheakei.

resist the penetration of a sharp or cutting instrument. pautou.

to make someone go to the center. tharimarei.

to be crowded (perfective). hithokokei.

the dog discovered a danta and started barking at it. hiimani shama ke a ha shurukuruni, a nowã tayoma.

to bark at someone, to shout (dog). tayoamai.

(related word). shikeye.

en el lugar donde se alzaban rocas puntiagudas unas junto a otras, los trozos de la danta se desparramaron por el suelo (después de caer sobre esas rocas). pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope hami shamariwe a pata akatuhu yapikirariyoma (mit.

puntiagudo, afilado, cortante, aguzado; áspero, rugoso. akatuhu.

to fish by tying a fishing line to a branch. fãsitha karoramai.

to fish by tying a fishing line to a branch. fãsitha.

pliega el brazo (fold your arm). poko ta tishakoiku.

to bend, to fold, to hang in an arched shape. tishakokei.

to make (something) pivot or spin around itself describing many turns. fãmori.

corn husk. yono mosisi.

husk, shell, sheath. mosisi.

you always oppose (our decisions) because you are afraid. wa ha kirini wa wã shiro remotii ma re kui.

always. remotii.

the hekura started smiling. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma o a kasi watetou yakea ayakema.

to smile. wateo.

they feared a tobacco theft. pee nahe pe nohi horihipomahe.

to be frantic, to be scared. puhi horihou.

to fear, to feel apprehension, to be disconcerted, to be bewildered. horihi.

sudden and violent pain. uri-.

to be a bad shooter. sina: ser un mal tirador.

to be a bad shooter. sina.

impure red (red mixed with other shades). wake puhi ikihiwe.

1. to be on the verge of tears, 2. a mixed color, not pure. ikihiwe.

thanks to the soap, it will certainly become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to become clean or white. auprouwei.

it's exactly like that. faye minaha.

exactly, precisely. faye.

"We are tired of hearing them. "wamaki ã wã hirimou wãri. ", he said immediately. ", e kua nokarema.

the piranhas immediately cut the penises of the capuchin monkeys as soon as they coupled. siparariwe ke peni hoashiri ke pe mo wari wetii nokamou ha kuparuni (mit.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to happen immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. hirimou.

to have a strange sensation, not to be oneself, to feel as if one were another (due to an illness, being under the effect of a magical substance). puhipe yai tha.

to have a strange sensation, not to be oneself, to feel as if one were another (due to an illness, being under the effect of a magical substance). copuhi.

to divide into two groups that follow divergent directions. pakaraota-.

to poke someone's eye with a fingertip. mamo hipipei.

to poke. hipipei.

desire to eat meat. naiki.

to get dark (at dusk). itutou.

used for magic. aroari keki, ihiru keki, koãmashi keki.

snake, worm, caterpillar. keki.

a small portion of meat that is offered. wahakewemi.

they turned around and began to move away when the little frog transformed into a jaguar. the pe humapi rea payekeprou tehe wawa hena ira kuprou shoarayoma.

to begin to move away. payekeprou.

the ketipa leaves tear easily. ketipa hena si sheaai si ihehewe.

to tear, to break (in one place). sheaai.

it is still a young tree and also it can be The word 'hi' in Yanomami means 'tree'. huya ke hi.

it is. hi.

I have the eye irritated by a foreign body. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to have arrived at having the eye irritated by a foreign body. ripuripupirayou.

small frog (unidentified). pretipretimi.

nosotros avanzamos hacia ti, una planta ãmoamo liviana metida en el hueco de nuestro labio inferior. yamaki husi ka no ãmoãmopi hena karei ta kuikiyo (cha.

lower lip. heãmo.

to put order in what is crammed. wararamai.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

small, to scratch or uncover the ground with the foot to . hãrãrurei.

to put food to boil. yorumapei.

yo partiré mañana. henaha ya huheripe.

mañana ustedes se divertirán. henaha ke wamaki iriamope.

pasado mañana. fai the henaha.

tomorrow. huheripe.

the roa tree had a very comfortable protuberance (for holding on to). roa ke hi ereheã topraa totihipariyoma.

very comfortable (for holding on to). totihipariyoma.

mother-in-law, however my brother-in-law ate all the wapu fruits (while you suppose that they are not yet ripe). yape, shoriweni wapu ke ki nohi waa waikireiwei.

all the fruits. waikireiwei.

burned (perfective, plural object). ishirariyo.

the maize began immediately to grow in an extensive area (myth) (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). yono mo haa aka praukua re shoarayoheriiwei (mit.

to expand, enlarge, become extensive. prauku.

and if, when evening falls, we crouch on the plain. weyate, he yari ha yamaki ha ta yereiku.

dusk fell, then night, and he stayed there (in the tree) until morning. the mi weyarayoma, the he titirayoma, iha re the tikeo he haruma (mit.

evening, dusk, nightfall. weyate.

when one possesses arrows, like us, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

to kill, to be able to kill. fetuo.

they did not enter (our house), they passed the night going around it. pe hanomi, pe ãyoãprarou he harutoma.

they passed the night going around. ãyoãprarou.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashiakei.

let's eat now. hei tehe pemaki ta iya.

he just left. hei tehe a hurayoma.

from now on I have no intention of allowing our goods to be given away (to visitors). hei tehe kamiyeni ya matohipi no hipeamapimi totihiwe.

now, at once, immediately. peam.

to be spacious locally. hauhua.

the arrendajos of white back possessed, in other times, the pijiguaos of the clearer variety. mope herasi re auwei mopeni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe (mit.

a variety of pijiguaos less red than the others. mopeni.

younger relative, younger brother. she.

he did not offer me anything. yare tarema.

to offer nothing to someone. re2.

I'm not approaching, I'm going to live in the forest. ya aheteomi, wãyumi ke ya ayou.

to go live in the forest. wã-.

Caterpillar cocoon. ehererepi.

to revive someone's breath, to bring someone back to life (lit. fmishiã ukei (cha. : to extract the breath). ).

to have a breath that precedes physical presence in a place (like birds). ukerehe.

ramas laterales de los árboles, las que están inclinadas hacia el suelo, tienen frutas momo oshe pe ma kui riha. weteteawei.

give me gratuitously (= without giving anything in return) an arrow tip with curare. ipa no mai ha namo ta totopa.

arrow tip with curare. namoki.

to pretend something is dirty or impure. shamimou.

I call him father (= he is a classificatory father for me). kama ke iha ya hiimou.

to call (someone) father, to have a father-child relationship with (someone). hiimou.

The Yanomami paint themselves black when they go to war. pe wayu huu tehe yãnomãmi pe ishimou.

to paint oneself black (plural subject). ishiprou.

it was at this time that I began to make love (regularly). re tehe ya sirisirimou kutariyoma.

to make love (said by a man). sirisirimou.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihi.

Good banana. Wake heãmatimi.

good. heãmatimi.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the shamans (enemies), to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

a type of spider whose hairs cause severe itching; shamans embody it to repel their enemies during battles. hãhãrãmãema.

we went down to the river a little further upriver. yamaki ithoa orahakema.

a little further upriver. orahakema.

the peccaries forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

they forced (someone) to accompany them. yaumareheriiwei.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another people or women from one. pashikitou.

to have grown beard. kaweirayou.

this is going to come loose. the prohoai.

to be loose, slack. prohoprou.

to have memory lapses (habitually). mratimratiwe.

(he/she) started having a cramp. shi tiatia.

to start having a cramp. tiatia.

to acquire the shape of a short loaf; to elongate a little. torohai.

I am hungry. nashi hi ha suwe a ohotamoro.

to have a craving for something one did not previously crave. ohotatariyo.

to be hungry. ohotamomai.

los árboles horoeti son realmente muy frágiles, se rompen muy fácilmente. the hi noni ta yaitani, ihi re the hipe kreyou si ihehewe ta yaitani.

to become fragile. noniprou.

the child is already crawling. ihiru a terekou waikiwe.

to walk on all fours, to crawl. hotho.

ashes. urihi.

Assisted a sick person by rubbing them (perfective aspect). hurikirei.

they went hunting (this morning). pe rãmi ayou ke a kuroi.

my older brother went hunting. ãiwe a rãmi huma.

hunt. rãmi.

to obtain an object that a person has received from another. piyemarei.

when the woman had fled far away, Oso hormiguero stopped being sleepy (= woke up). suwe ke a tokua ma waikirayoheriiwei ha, teperiwe ke a wãri maharishi mrai ha kuparuni.

had fled far away. waikirayoheriiwei.

to be afraid. kipiyoru.

it is grooved (lit. the mimou enina.

to be finely striated or grooved. erirã.

there where the giant cachicamo is, in its lair, I will asphyxiate it (with smoke) and cook it. waka a re titirati, ya mishi ha tumaparini, ya wãri ta ripia.

to strangle, to suffocate, to asphyxiate. titirati.

to go to someone. rotaai.

the compota de cambur is homogeneous. tate u si kopehewe.

not homogeneous, with solid particles. contesiki.

we advance towards you, a light ãmoamo plant inserted into the hole of our lower lip. yamaki husi ka no ãmoãmopi hena karei ta kuikiyo (cha.

a light plant inserted into the hole in the lower lip. ãmoãmopi.

to pulse, to beat regularly (like a heart); to feel stings. yokoyokomo-.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to arm a bow to hit a specific target. pehi iyomai.

to tense a bow. iyomai.

since everyone wanted to participate in the war expedition, they did not pound the bones of the cremated dead (myth). pe komi wayu huu puhio yaro, pei ishi pe kãi tikai mahei (mit.

to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. wayu huu.

I'm going to touch your nose with the glans. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

to do it repeatedly with the glans. tiprushirarei.

to have itchy rashes. shihitipiai.

to crush an object between two others. wakeamai.

while the members of my community stay to kill the enemy effigy, I walk ahead in the company of the others. kamiye yamakini iha no owe a shei hoohe nareo tehe ya paria narerayoherima.

to kill an effigy. hoohe.

he is angry. mataremi thotho.

to be angry. mataremi.

(he/she) speaks upriver. prukuimi ãsi.

upriver (speech). prukuimi.

to put something in the bottom of. hushomimai.

to kill a brave man (and thus put the enemies in distress). yapekeprai.

1. to fall ill (and due to this disrupt the course of one. yapeke.

I am crippled with pain. yã mi no hore re wayuhi thawei.

to be crippled. thawei.

(no clear translation). nikere.

to hang one. hehãtããi.

the opening of the basket is narrower than its base. yorehi si ka iyoyowe.

to have a narrower opening than the base. iyoyoa.

it is pleasant to touch with the foot (= it is pleasant to the touch). the kapamamou totihitawe.

to be unpleasant to the touch. hupe.

oh father of mine, appear (lament). hapemi a ta petaru.

father, brother of the father, husband of the paternal aunt. hapemi.

to wait for a food to acquire a floury consistency. hotetiamai.

to kill someone with a harpoon arrow. ãtãri ãhiprai.

go there to hunt váquiros. ware ke ki ta niyapraharu.

to hunt. praharayo.

todos ellos treparon, todos ascendieron penosamente. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

ascended penosamente (with difficulty). hãmorimoherima.

to miss a target repeatedly. blansiki.

progressed slowly river downstream, one after the other. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

progressed slowly one after the other. hirihipekiriowei.

on the slope of that mountain, where they hang from the trees, I will cut those lianas. fei pariki re uprayaﬁ, fei thoo thoku re tuyahi, ya thoku ta pafetipra.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will say that without a doubt (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

to be located in front of, and at a certain distance (variable), from the place of the utterance. pafetipra.

flame that goes out and rekindles repeatedly, one after the other. waketou.

to paint a motif composed of two crossed lines on someone. yãhiriãi.

to be invisible, not to show oneself. mohotuprawe.

bite it. fhe wetiai.

to bite. wetiai.

they penetrated into the conuco (they crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hay u o m a.

they crossed the morichal (and left it behind). eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

we, the ones who pass (the river), are the people of Shitoshito. s h i s h ito theri yamaki re hayuope (mit.

to pass, to leave behind, to cross, to traverse a space from one edge to another. theka.

your husband. wãrohe.

the path is narrow (it is closing up with the growing vegetation). yo wãkerewe.

narrow, tight. wãkerewe.

you have to start telling the truth. wa kãi rii ha pehetitaruni.

to start telling the truth. pehetitou.

he does not walk fast. a haiimi.

he/she does not walk fast. haiimi.

to start walking. katiai.

to become stiff or rigid due to effort. hiraraprou.

to make something go beyond, to let something go beyond. toreheamai.

to have oneself painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakiramou.

to align, to press together. shani-.

to offer, to give as a gift. iweye.

the butterflies expelled the peccaries upon arriving (at their home). hurari peni kayufanariwe pe yashuprai re kupeherouwehei.

they expelled/attacked upon arriving. kupeherouwehei.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

it sank. paotariyoma.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). sepeso.

they killed their younger brother/sister. pe ai pe sheremahe.

as they wanted to take his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

they killed him/her/it. sheremahe.

(speaks of upriver). sharurumi henaki.

wild plant (unidentified). sharurumi.

child associated with the hayakawe palm. hayakawãyoma.

when it became completely day many bees started to converse. pe the haruu hititiprou tehe puu nari pe ã pruka re wayorayouwei.

to chat, converse, talk. wayorayouwei.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to break into small pieces. nakashii.

null. hurepaya.

hallucinogen that does not cause loss of consciousness, whose effect is felt while remaining lucid. wayu wararawe.

they say that you are an infallible shooter and expect your intervention. wa nihite wãhã ha hirapoheni, wa puhurai kupiyehei.

your intervention. kupiyehei.

to be a little thin, a little worn out from use or corroded by moisture. frepisihi.

Amakurithawe just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe (cha.

to set fire to magical substances. piyemaparihe.

to discover something while walking. fpomikeherii.

He arrived at his house and immediately stuck his machete (in a post of the dwelling, to store it that way). kama hãtopi nahi re kuawei hami a kokema, e siparapi shatia shoamapeheroma.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. kihami ya koketayoma pei maki hami ya peria nareatayoa (mit.

to arrive, to reach, to come back. kokema.

the opening of the basket is narrower than its base. yorehi si ka iyoyowe.

to have a narrower opening than the base. iyoyowe.

I got blisters on my hand from the axe handle. hãyokoma pei hithoni ya imiki si poshoprariyoma.

I got several blisters. poshoprariyoma.

the fish that swarm in large numbers (= the fish that swim in large numbers in the river). hei ki re shurirorati.

to flutter, to be stirred up or agitated by the wind, to swirl around; to swarm in large numbers. shurirai.

to make something too short (to be able to join, tie, reach). hawemarei.

he cut the inner curved part of the palm petiole to make a basket. yei wa siki hãkãmi ha karoprarini, pehe amo ta uke.

to cut. uke-.

he consumed all the tobacco. pee nahe mi watheprarema.

Hoo had eaten his brains completely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema (mit.

consumed completely, devoured entirely. watheprarema.

to soil or stain something, with plural objects. shamimararei.

as those who were walking in front changed direction again, we slid towards them crouched. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction suddenly. akehetamai.

to go beyond, to surpass (in height), to become bigger than. paroprou.

tree, Simaruba; Jacaranda copaia (Bignoniaceae). shitipori.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to get a bruise. hãepotopiai.

snake, Sapa aguacero; Helicops angulatus (Colubridae). Small venomous snake that is often found in water. Its bites are not fatal, but can cause the loss of a finger.. sikapi.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are crowded together there, and then lick the juice of the cooked (fish) that comes out of them. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

to catch fish by pulling on a line. shaireni.

he let his saliva drool, and then sucked it back up. kama kahu upe ukurayoma.

let drool saliva and then suck it back up before it falls. ukurayoma.

they were already far away when he arrived at the house (camp). pe wãri payekou ke tehe yahi hami a kopema.

to move away, to separate, to put at an adequate distance. payekou.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed by falling to the ground (a single object). tikuhou.

to be completely flared out towards the edge. ehetewe.

to give a fluid consistency to a drink during its preparation, to make a dye lighter. ereshiprai.

tree species whose bark cannot be removed because it is very attached to the trunk. fwãro.

they hid (objects in the forest). momo pe thari re roamapinowei.

they hid (objects in the forest). roamapinowei.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonamini poo a ha hokereni, moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

Horonami hung up the banana peels and pierced them. horonamini tate e ki re waiwei, e siki re rukekeitwei (mit.

a mythological figure in Yanomami folklore. horonamini.

the váquiros were approaching the place where we were ambushed. yamaki re reayoruawei ha ware ke pe ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

to get close, to approach. titetou.

we will eat the fish here, then we will leave. heha yuri peheki ha warini.

to leave, to depart. warini.

your songs (for the deceased) are not heard. pemaki ãmoã ã wãri hiriimi.

your songs (for the deceased). hiriimi.

my younger brother engendered it (= my younger brother is its father). aiyeni ke a tararema.

to engender, to procreate. tarare.

to dry; to dry up, to evaporate. weheti.

to have compressed, to have tightened. ãkikikei.

dried tobacco. ía.

the dog was small, not big. wãisipi a wai hiima kuoma, prewe mai.

to diminish, become smaller, narrow. wãisipiprou.

they arrived and gathered. e pe re shimoopareyorunowei.

they gathered. shimoopareyorunowei.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to have fallen seriously ill (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb . parohorayou.

to have a slip of the tongue, to use one word for another. hãroprou.

to become completely rough, rugose, granular, stony. erereprou.

who inclined (the container) of my kashuhuri seeds. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

I waited for the paují to land (before shooting it with an arrow). paruri ya romakema.

to place or make something lean in a certain place. yotehemakei.

to shout when one is in a dangerous situation, to call for help. sirãrãmou.

that the demons of bitterness fall to the ground, since you want to make me kill. hei a pitha re praope, a koãmiri prerei ma yaio mapei ha, ware niya sheamai ta ayaoyo.

you want to make me kill. ayaoyo.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other. nonohokei.

on each occasion the ancestors let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

to let escape, to put to flight (animals, enemies), to let a fish escape; to allow someone to flee, to help someone flee; to flee in the company of a woman [tokuamai: to facilitate the escape of many people]. tokuamai.

vine or climbing plant. ãshitho.

in an instant, Lagarto cut in several pieces the beehive that he let fall, then he slid down quickly along the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to slide down quickly along a tree trunk. sherorai.

to begin to grow large (a tobacco plant). kumamasiãi.

(Rabipelado le lanzó) un dardo (envenenado) que rebotó sobre su garganta. pei re orãmisi hami e masi mãiã re nokamareiwei.

a poisoned dart. orãmisi.

to have walked describing a curve. shokerayou.

to sleep deeply. sutao.

to start to surpass (in height). torehou.

no large pot is in sight, no large pot is hanging in the house (= we don't have any). hapoka pata a ma re taprou mai, hapoka pata pe ma re rukeprou mapei.

to be hanging, to be suspended. rukeprou.

to share the food of others. shoayou.

little one, don't bend your legs (keep them spread and straight, as a novice should during an initiation). shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai (cha.

to sit or squat with legs spread and bent, to be in that position. preprekeai.

Macagua had drawn ugly circles on his body. prereimariwe wãritiwe a oni pata rohehoma.

had drawn. rohehoma.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

to scratch, to graze, to cause a superficial wound. yahe.

attention, their voices sink/disappear under the ground. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

attention, their voices sink/disappear under the ground. tikooheri.

he felt bliss and sat on the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

to feel completely well, to feel satisfaction or bliss, to be happy. tipea.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

to approach (a goal). aheteprariyo.

they (the hekura) could not easily lift the great rock, and it oscillated (in their hands). pei maki hereheprai ha maparuheni, pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma (cha.

light, lightweight. hereh.

to choose to give as a gift. makehewe.

to become rigid for a moment under the effect of an effort. hiraratou.

he is the one who wants to kill you and with that intention he got a bamboo tip. ihini re wa riyã matamai ha totihioni wa pehi tea totihirei kurei.

to kill, to make disappear. totihirei.

vacillating, unsure of himself, Pico de lacre transported the fire. yorekitiraweni e wake kãi heheheaprarou kupariyoma.

to move with little security. heheheaprarou.

fly eggs, especially on meat. mothemothe.

two-toed sloth; Bradypus didactylus (Bradypodidae). The sloth is not eaten, except in some regions where its consumption is limited to the elderly. Shimiyeteopewe: mythological ancestor; hekura. In mythology, Shimiyeteopewe causes the death of Rabipelado and is indirectly the cause of the diversity of birds.. Shimiyeteopewe.

to be separated; to constitute two residential groups. pashihiwe.

to move blindly. hosisiãi.

to crumble, to collapse. hashishiprou.

go downstream to look for cambur palm fruits (bringing the bunch in the hand). tapitapirimi ke ki ta yepikirio.

to lift, to pick up and carry an object. yepirei.

(unspecified meaning). ihama.

after that you will put other logs on top. ai ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

1. To put on top, to cover, to wrap; 2. Factitive of . heakaamai.

to cram, pack tightly. hithoko.

I was openly hostile, I did not hide that I detested them. ya napemou hitheonomi, ya nape keo ha kuparuni, hekura ai a wai re yãkãreipe nohi wãripou hitheonomi.

to demonstrate hostility, to show malice, to threaten. napemou.

he thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

to make thinner. ishinapiprai.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to break into small pieces. nakashiprou.

to gather its fruits (durative, plural object). mãhomai.

knead the bread. tate ya hutikai.

to knead, to squeeze lightly a fruit to soften it. hutikai.

Yoawe turned over (in his hammock). yoawe e mi re hatuprariyowei.

to turn over, to roll over. hatuprariyowei.

let's stay here (you and I). eyeha peheki ta kuo.

"leave her here (and abandon her)", the yawari will say (myth). "eyeha re a wãri ta huhea hairihe", yawari pe kuma (mit.

here, in this place (where the speaker is located). eyeha.

he is angry. sherekawe naka hi.

to be angry. sherekawe.

the tapirs are at rest (one after another). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were many rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hoththoã.

fabricate an oblong object. toroheakei.

women, I beg you to participate all (in this activity). suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in an activity (in the forest). hãithomai.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with the beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

advanced towards me with open beak. totihioimama.

black caracara (bird species). chupacacao.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club on him. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to make fall by pushing down an inclined plane. oromakei.

to receive leftovers. waiki.

(examples of trees whose bark is usable). fãifãiyomi nathahi, hãho nathahi, iwaiwa nathahi, yãri nathahi.

tree or shrub whose bark is usable. nathahi.

faint sound of an engine in the distance. motoro ke ãmomiã.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma (mit.

faint noise, barely perceptible. ãsithaki.

juvenile acne. shohe mo.

(classifier noun). mo.

to be afraid. motaha.

they took a bath to purify their bodies that smelled after the cremation. ke kipi ni hithãri pakokai kuaai re paki shoatariyowei.

to purify oneself, to purify oneself with water in the morning after a cremation. pakeke.

the people upriver use such narrow loinclothes that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

not be completely full, plurality of places where people went before dying, be located on both sides of. roprawe.

to beat someone repeatedly with a stick or club. arikayorayou.

to unite two points to allow passage from one to the other; to build a footbridge to cross a stream. ihirã.

when you dream Mahariri it scares you (= it gives you nightmares). wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi ahimari.

to dream, to see in dreams. poremou.

to eat quickly in that way (humorous). krãrikrãrimou.

to crunch, to eat a food that crunches between the teeth. krãriãi.

had malaria. hurapirayou.

to grab with the mouth or snout. weihou.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama (mit.

inflated, dilated, swollen (perfective aspect). shuwerayou.

to bend strongly, to fold to the breaking point (extreme of an object); to arch, to bend strongly under the weight of a load. pehuprou.

to let something deteriorate (by negligence). hotemai.

food that falls apart during cooking. kohihipei.

to kick multiple objects or perform multiple kicking actions. kahathomai.

to have an empty stomach, to be hungry. koehe.

to be iridescent, shimmering. terereã.

1) to come off as a result of a blow (a fragment). 2) to hit sideways. yayeti.

it is in that rock that he penetrated. hei ke ki ha a rukerayou kurei (mit.

he introduced his penis and made love. rani.

there where the ãpuri tree rises, there where a koshiro beehive is found, I will go to collect honey (lit. ei ãpuri hi re uprayahi, ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni, ya naki ta ruwemoma.

to destroy a beehive to harvest honey (lit.: deprive of warmth). ãpuri.

the fruits of the moriche palm take on a slightly yellowish color when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to take that color (of a fruit when ripe). okoroshiprou.

arena. mramraka.

to resurrect, to come back to life. hori.

toxic juice extracted from bitter cassava. nashi hiki nashi hi ãmo.

toxic juice extracted from bitter cassava. hiki.

to make love with a man (said by a woman). na wamou.

to make love. wai.

until the extremities of the axes of the people of the macaws were damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

the extremity was damaged. hãyokomãpi.

it rained all night. sheta, ihi the pe wãri pouamou haruu kuprei.

to rain constantly. pouamou.

he opened a path pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

two guayucos have been placed one next to the other. porakapi wayuko ke kipi herurua.

the knife does not cut. sipara si a namo tãihiwe.

to reject someone with the hand; to push aside something obstructing the path; to be stacked on top of each other; to stumble; to be expelled. yutu.

there was a hammock of vines decorated with several transverse stripes, it was hung up in the middle. thoopi thoku tiprutuwe yãoma, thoopi thoku mi wereoma.

hung up in the middle, directed towards the ground. wereoma.

those (knowing the region) knew that that stream of water was the last (they said): "this is the last (there is no other)". mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i.

1. to not accompany; 2. to leave a part of something for someone, to leave a remainder, to not eat everything, to not give everything. heikiai.

trees will fall on the path. hiki mohe yoakei.

to fall violently face down. yoakei.

to miss someone, to feel sadness for the absence of a loved one (perfective). iyorayou.

to become dark, to darken. ruweai.

fabricar en gran cantidad. yaharaprai.

as Mount Maiyo gradually disappeared under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear completely under water. shototoprou.

we orient ourselves and return to follow the path. yamaki re kateheprouwei, yama yo nosi re tea koreiwei.

we orient ourselves and return to follow the path. kateheprouwei.

to accompany someone back. nosi yukeyoruu.

to return. yukeyoruu.

you must inform me correctly, brother-in-law, that is my opinion. ware nowã ta thaa ta shaririparini, shori ya puhi kurani ha (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to do/say correctly. shariri.

shaman that combats the demons of disease. shawararithawe.

to cover an object or hide it behind something to prevent theft. shãhotaai.

durative. dur..

when the cave stopped being suffocating, they (entered and) cut Yotenama into pieces. yotenama ke a pata theka naki mrai tehe, a pata re pahetirareiwei (mit.

they cut into pieces. pahetirareiwei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). preshetemi.

apúrense a lanzarse al agua. pe ta keo ta haioparu.

slowly, without haste. taaru.

He put himself down on the ground for a moment. Rasitou ama pei.

to put oneself down on the ground for a moment. rasitou.

to be separated, to live in different communities. pashihou.

keeping her distance, she parted her hair and looked for lice. noma pe ha taeni, rapa ha e pe hapreshama.

to uncover, discover (that which is hidden or masked); to remove the cotton husk, to part the hair to look for lice; to turn the pages of a book (neologism). apresheai.

after having been moving slowly, Deer then went quickly. hayariwe ke poko siki hoã ha hairápido (después de haber estado desplazándose kiraruni, a rerei shoaoma).

to walk/go quickly. kiraruni.

supernatural being associated with lightning. thãhirãwe.

headdress of the hekura covered with white down. watoshe horoi.

a small frog. preipreimi.

to twist, to bend the tip of an object. toyekeai.

yo poseo un arco untado con resina que está apoyado (contra algo). ipa the nahi sipo tapitapipi ithãpraa hea.

untado con resina. ithãpraa.

I fold the loincloth in two. wayuko ya ki shãkoprai.

to fold in two. shãkoprai.

to give something to someone in its entirety. haikikei.

when the Yanomami woman arrived at her house and also it can be The word 'yãnomãmi' in Yanomami means 'Yanomami (people)'. do a la mujer yãnomãmi, él llegó a su casa.

Yanomami. yãnomãmi.

the man was squeezing Siroromi tightly without letting go. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to compress, to squeeze tightly. ãkikiãkei.

above all do not think that I call him son-in-law without having that kinship relation with him (= he is truly my son-in-law). horehore e the kaﬁki fekamaa pea ta kurani, a kutihe.

son-in-law. fekamaa.

I feel like vomiting. ya no suharayopi.

1. To swallow, to pass through the esophagus. 2. To vomit, to regurgitate.. suha.

to be rapidly invaded by vegetation. wãkererayou.

no hay hombre valiente (= no eres valiente). a wãri waitheri periami yai.

río arriba (en la montaña) aquellos bichos que se llaman jejenes, son realmente agresivos. ora hami peti the pe wãhã re kuawei, the pe waitherio ha yaioni.

comportarse agresivamente. waitherimou.

aggressive, valiant. waitherio.

that one to whom the mouth of X calls father. X kahiki re hiimouwei.

one to whom the mouth of X calls father. hiimouwei.

to bring heavy or bulky objects close to the place where they will be used. ahetepramai: aproximar considerablemente ahi objetos pesados o voluminosos al lugar donde se 1 vb.

to bring heavy or bulky objects close. ahetepramai.

I got stuck by a deep river. mãu u oki ha ya shi wãrioma.

I left my arrow there where I couldn't go get it (in a tree where the speaker couldn't go get it). shereka ya shi wãrimakema.

to be blocked, to be stuck. wãrikei.

clearing on the riverbank, open space on the riverbank. fu ka yakea.

clearing of vegetation at the water's edge, place where one can easily land. fu noka wawea.

clearing, open space. yakere.

I have killed. ya ishorayoma.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

mosquitoes bite (lit. ukushi pe ishou.

to kill. ishorayou.

the souls invited them one by one, until the last one. yãmona kiha re ma pe peso a hi kãi tiyei re kukeiwehei, yetu the hi hoã kãi ha haikiapotuheni.

to execute a task quickly. haiprai.

bone marrow, gastric mill of crab. oyoshipe.

I only take a dose of the yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi ya ki ayaai.

I collect only a part of the fruits. himohimo ya ki a y a a i.

to take only a part of something; to collect a part of something and save the rest for later; to consume something, or to collect the fruits of a tree, partially. ayaamai.

to drag, to pull, to haul, to drag something in a fall. pakakurei.

to produce clusters of. yakriki.

to turn to dust. kopehe.

Baba used to go to the forest to cook her packages of caterpillars on the embers. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

had the habit of, used to. aimoma.

he/she died. a nohi mohoturayoma.

they died. mohoturariyoma.

their voices were heard going around a curve in the forest. kei kuaai kuprei: se oyeron sus voces recorriendo una curva por la selva.

to move through the forest describing numerous curves. shokou.

they asked Scorpion: "You appoint/point at him. suhirina a nakamahe: "kaheni the ta niyapraayo. " (myth). " (mit.

appoint/point at him/her!. niyapraayo.

to cause to produce pots. turereamai.

Apparition stopped near him. poreawe ke a wãri re upratareyoruuwei (mit.

he/she/it stopped near him/her/it. upratareyoruuwei.

I am afraid. yeimi naki.

to be afraid. yeimi.

dented, deformed by a blow (in one place). wãukuã.

the false shamans interrupt all the time their songs. horemou ke the pe ã re haiwei the pe matha re waiatarou (cha.

interrupt. haiwei.

the monkeys chillered in pain when they inserted their penis, and the fish cut it off. titiri pe mo tititou tehe yuri peni pe mo ha wetirini, pe rããmoma.

a mythological figure. titiri.

to carry a child mounted on the shoulders. yakaropou.

stop threatening all the time (= stop threatening). a wã tetea he yatiparuhe.

although he said he wouldn't do it, he took out his teeth. maa a ma kuu tehe, naki hoyoa he yatikema (mit.

to insist on doing something, to keep doing something despite being told not to. yatiparuhe.

on the shoulders and on the tail he placed a woven basket. pei hakoki hami, pei teshina ha yorehi ke e si kãi re shatimakeiwei.

a woven basket. shatimakeiwei.

to blow (a breeze). huriri.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

to come here, to move towards here. ãweãwe.

the people upriver use such narrow loinclothes that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

to be located on both sides of. karoprawe.

when felling an apia tree, I crushed the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

ocumo plant. ohinaye.

to return on one. yapapei.

toxic juice extracted from bitter cassava. nashi hiki nashi hi ãmo.

toxic juice extracted from bitter cassava. hiki.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to reflect, to ponder. yekeri.

the Yanomami paint themselves black when they go to war. pe wayu huu tehe yãnomãmi pe ishimou.

to paint oneself entirely black. ishimou.

overgrown (especially a conuco or path). yasikikei.

to doze off, to nod off. thareheai.

base of a pot. toutami si si ka iyoyo kohomo.

to make a container whose opening is narrower than the base. iyoyai.

that no one remain behind. ai pe huu heparuhe.

remain. quede.

Woodpecker suddenly hung upside down from a curare vine and pecked at it. mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

1. To hang or be hung upside down; to dangle. 2. To accompany someone, follow someone.. yau.

to be twisted locally, to be twisted only at one point. torokai.

fart that prolongs emitting a more or less high-pitched noise. kiyomou.

he works a lot. a ohotamou no motahawe.

they are always talking. the pe ã wayou no motaai.

very, much, often. motahawe.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

to dominate by size, to be bigger than. morokoã.

to say frankly, to say without hesitation. fkuu katitia.

correct, well done; really, truly. katitia.

to walk doubled over (due to severe stomach pain). haotai.

I realized later that you had offered a hammock. amaka ke wa ki kãi ma re hipekenowe thai.

adorned with longitudinal stripes, like the hammocks of the "Whites", so are their backs. hei nape ke pe amakapi e pe pata oni sherorowe re kure naha, e naha keki yaipe oni kuwe.

hammock made of cloth. amakapi.

we who will go (he and I). kamiye pehekini pehe a niyapraama.

we two are dirty (he and I). kamiye yaheki shapehekini pehe pe niyapraama.

both, the two (of us). niyapraama.

I left an arrow at home and the women broke it in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

they broke it in my absence. kuraheshi.

to take, give or receive two objects at once. yãhu.

to drink a large quantity of banana puree. kuratha u preai.

to receive a large quantity. prepei.

(myth): it crouched to jump, it went up, it went to the sky. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to crouch to jump (animal). pusututou.

I am already sleepy. ya maharishi waikiwe.

little one, have you woken up already. pusi, wa maharishi mraa waikirayou.

to have sleepiness, to feel sleepy. fekotoma.

he who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and without waiting deflowered her. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei (mit.

leg, hind leg. heturema.

be attentive while walking. a ta moyaweaheri.

be attentive while walking. moyaweaheri.

the cotton (thread) with which the fletching of the arrows is made. shinari shereka pe he re haomamouwei.

cotton thread used to attach feather fletching to arrows. haomamouwei.

to put water in a container. huyukou.

I got lost. ya mohorurayom a.

to get lost, to stray. oru.

food that can accompany another. tehiamou.

to be happy, to be glad. hãshãe.

I will go. shitiparimi.

that was what I wanted to do (said upon returning after killing an enemy) and also it can be The word 'thaprai' in Yanomami means 'to kill'. ya the pe niya thaprai ta kui.

kill. thaprai.

to dry out inside (wood). kakashiprou.

to keep something in a container inside which the objects are compressed. kaopou.

to sit or squat for a while at the edge of the water. rotapariyo.

they told me not to do it. yare wasirema.

I told them to be quiet: "stay calm" I said to them. ya the pe ã wasia katitia waikirei kuhe: "mamikai ke pe wai ta kuiku", ya kuma.

to prohibit, to tell someone not to do something. wasia.

to avoid an obstacle or a prohibited relative by going around it. hãrorãyou.

to let a magic substance drip onto someone's head. yãnote una sustancia mágica sobre la cabeza de alguien.

to leak, to drip (a liquid); a little clear (a tint). reshi.

I don't have a tobacco quid under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a tobacco quid under the upper lip. nosinosi.

to arch, to be arched; to be lying back due to a load with too short a strap (the load rests on the kidneys instead of the buttocks). mi krehetheo.

to arch, to bend backwards. krehetheai.

to interpose (changing place) to protect someone. reaprarou.

to receive a piece cut in that way. pakaropei.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their tools, their tools did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slide without penetrating (the blade of a tool in poor condition). pahehãmahe.

to feel pain when urinating, said to be caused by eating pijiguaos (fruits) that have been pecked by the blue-headed parrot. niaasi ãrimapi.

blue-headed parrot. ãrimapi.

I will return. ya hua korayou.

to return, to come back. korayou.

to deviate someone. yakehou.

breast; teat. sifu.

to be a little light. fherehehe.

they are establishing a new conuco upriver. ora hami pe hikarimou piyeo.

I gut the cow with the knife, then I will butcher it with the machete. sipara sini ware ya shipe ka thai, siparani ya pakekeprai piyeope.

he ran to another place, looked and really didn't see anything. a rerea ha piyeikuni, miãkini, tapraimi totihiwe.

he named the different places in the jungle. urihi ke ki ãhã weyei piyekoma (mit.

indicates a change of place, activity, actor or instrument. piyeope.

they were following the tracks. pe mãyo nosi teaprarai kuaamahe.

they were following/pursuing. kuaamahe.

to protect oneself by placing. hikoromou.

to attack enemies. karukai.

to spread the wings. hehehai.

they piled up the hunted animals in front of Horonãmi upon arrival. horonãmi re iha e pe hirapraai yaimou re kupeherouwei.

to pile up upon arrival. kupeherouwei.

to be slightly open towards the exterior. uhehewe.

makayari: maleficent beings related to piles of rocks, they take possession of the soul of human beings. makayari: seres maléficos relacionados con los cúmulos de rocas, se apoderan del pei mi ãmo de los seres humanos.

maleficent beings related to piles of rocks, they take possession of the soul of human beings. makayari.

The giant Spirit-cachicamo looks at us with the corner of his eye. wakariwe mamo re repotaruhe ye.

to look with the corner of the eye. repotaruhe.

I got a migraine. ya heki ninipema.

I got a migraine. ninipema.

I was lying awake in my hammock for a long time without saying anything and they woke up one by one. ya mamo kãi peritio tehe the pe komi rãprou.

to lie in a hammock awake and silent. peritio.

my daughter, who are you in love with. oãsi weti sho waheki nohimayou.

to be in a relationship of friendship with someone, to love someone. imãyou.

(he) has really the intention of making it end. a mi niya wathemai ha totihioni.

to have the real intention of making something end, to have the real intention of killing something. wathemai.

to make dry; to protect from rain. wehetiamai.

she has a baby at the breast. oshe a yakapou.

the banana shoots are small. kuratha sipe oshe.

young, recent, new; baby, child. teori.

lie down. a ta periiku.

accompany us, we will return tomorrow. a ta yauiku, henaha pemaki koãkoã shoapei.

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs. iku.

to put in a container or cavity (plural object). titiprawe.

to get a little better for a while and then get worse again. wahutou.

I forgave them. ya pe nohi asipema.

I forgave them. asipema.

the cresta of the paují is erect. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to have become erect (fur or feathers of an animal). mãririrayou.

grab your bow, it will serve you as a lance to kill babillas. ahe re the hi ta tere, iwa ke wa pe tiwehape.

it will serve you as a lance to kill babillas. tiwehape.

a place to propitiate luck during a search for honey, hunting, etc.; removing leaves from the path with the foot (with the same purpose). fopósito.

the ãro vines are really very tough. ãro ke the thotho pe ﬁhuo fa yaioni.

tough, resilient, hard to break. ﬁhuo.

to become concave on the outside (terminative aspect). wapokoprou.

to kill birds to use their feathers as adornment. fpaushipi.

the two women lay down immediately next to each other in the hammock. thoo ke thoku ha suwe ke kipi parekea mi hetutua shoakema.

to place side by side, to lie next to. pareke.

skeleton. iki.

it is inside. hushomi hami the kua.

in the interior, in the bottom. fhushomi.

(to tie) the legs of a dead bird. mamisiki yorekai.

to tie the legs of a dead bird by turning them so that the claws catch behind the thighs (to carry it on one. yorekai.

to make grow, to cause healing. hatukeamai.

to have become wide, large, extended (in surface area). hauhurayou.

to do this energetically. yaisiprai.

there where the giant cachicamo is, in its lair, I will asphyxiate it (with smoke) and cook it. waka a re titirati, ya mishi ha tumaparini, ya wãri ta ripia.

to strangle, to suffocate, to asphyxiate. titirati.

se oía el ruido de la (carne) cruda que masticaban. riye ke the pe ha the pe shãkãushãkãumoma.

produce al masticar un alimento. shãkãushãkãumoma.

¿fue al ir a qué comunidad que alguien recogió mi huella (para hacer con ella magia negra). weti theri pe rii ha ya ta fuprei yare mãyo wãfã terare ma ta sihe ke.

to go to a community. fuprei.

I'm going to throw an arrow without a tip. makasi prokeni ya pehi ta niyapraa sho.

arrow tip. prokeni.

I make. mi nonoho.

to make. nonoho.

he bends his arm. poko ta shãkotaru.

to swing arms exaggeratedly while walking. fpokoku.

to become clear, limpid, translucent. ferushi.

the yakoana drug will make you senile. yakoana ke a wãrini wa moyepimarei.

to make someone lose their strength, to make someone impotent or senile. moyepimarei.

(no clear translation). nikere.

Abanico elaborado con hojas de palma trenzadas, generalmente provenientes de la palma shereka. Sirve para avivar el fuego y, menos frecuentemente, para abanicarse.. shuhema.

to carry a child on one. ãyorimarei.

to move in a very small group of two people. kororoai.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

let's go accompany the almonds with fruits. wapu a ha shosho pema mo tehiape (habla de río arriba.

to accompany food with another food. tehitehi.

to become beautiful. koshãpiai.

I have a desire to chew tobacco. nahe karepou shi toprao.

tobacco. karepou.

fabricar en gran cantidad. yaharaprai.

a type of vessel or pot. bakei.

to be distended. prihãwe.

it is always he who cures me. kamani yare shiro prukai.

to be cured several times in a row by a shaman; to be requested several times in a row by a patient whom one cures successfully. prukai.

sharp, pointed or thorny parts. nomaki.

the false shamans interrupt their songs all the time. horemou ke the pe ã re haiwei the pe matha re waiatarou (cha.

interrupt songs. waiatarou.

to curve multiple objects, give them the shape of an arc. payokoakei.

to have left too much water inside the tobacco when preparing a wad. uwemararei.

1. Squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; squeeze the juice out of a fruit in this way; squeeze the pulp of grated cassava to remove the juice, inside a cloth held in the hand; deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. 2. Have been squeezed locally.. ãhuhu.

spouse. yahamana.

to acquire this yellowish hue locally; to dye or paint yellow, to make something tend towards a yellow color, to dye something with a yellowish annatto. frãihãi.

se transformó en ranita y la cavidad del árbol rápidamente se estrechó. hi ka wãkikou ha kuikuni.

narrow, tight. wãkikiwe.

the cresta del paují is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to bristle (hair or feathers of an animal). mãririprou.

to install one. pepimou.

to climb a palm or a. hiriri.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while watching the surroundings (when an attack is feared). kohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; in birds: bony structure comprising the pubis and ilium. yairayou.

(noise) occurred nearby. wã tisukei.

to occur nearby (noise). tisukei.

dejar secar, prender fuego y esparcir las brasas. shirikimarini, wake yerini, wa ha yãrãreãrini.

to ignite. yerini.

the mountain is tall. hehu a isiwe.

tall, high. isiwe.

my body exhales a strong aphrodisiac smell. ya ni kumipi hirekou tharei.

the windows of your nose will then exhale a strong pleasant smell. wa hiyokaki ni kreteri hirakaa ha totihiparuni.

to emanate, to exhale a strong smell. ni hiraka.

The old woman sang the song of anger. suwe patani the ã wãyoã thapema.

1. anger, wrath 2. to be angry 3. to be in mourning. wãyo.

when the husband went hunting, Siroromi had the habit of coming to make love with the wife during his absence. pe heãropi e rãmi huaai tehe siroromi a kotããi yaimou ha heani, pe suwepi e na wai heama.

to hunt. frãmi.

to become less dense, to become more sparse, to clear (low vegetation). takaka.

Move away a little, my dear. oãsi, a ta payekeiku.

to move away a little, to separate, to put at an adequate distance. payekekei.

no matter how much I asked for goods, he did not respond favorably to my request. matohi ya pe nakama ma kui, a wã huonom i.

they do not respond (or: they do not want to give it). pe the pe ã huomi ke.

respond (to a question, to a call); respond favorably to a request. wã huo.

to have a limb that appears for an instant (out of the water). shorokotou.

to rise; to grow; to elevate, to place on high. tireai.

Swartzia grandifolia tree. kamakari sihi.

they will shoot several arrows at you. wa kãi taitaimai kukeihe.

noise made by falling arrows shot by warrior archers, and by extension, the warrior archers themselves. taitai.

the cassava plants fell off, detaching from the root. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

to fall off, detaching from the root. poruai.

I am squatting. mi kuyuhua.

to be in a squatting position. kuyuhu.

to be animated by a regular and repetitive movement, to undulate, to produce waves. kuaai.

tranquilízate (calm down). a ta yãnikik i.

to calm down, to become tranquil. yãnikik.

the demon of the quicksands dragged him to the bottom of its hole. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei.

it dragged (him/her/it) to the bottom. terekirionowei.

when they wanted to join the hekura, they abandoned the dwelling taking their hammocks. hekura pe rii hami pe waroo puhio tehe, pe shurukou shoaoma.

to temporarily abandon the dwelling or camp to go and live elsewhere, to leave taking one. shurukuai.

I have the habit of wrapping a thick vine (around my ankles) because they generally wear out quickly (when climbing or descending a palm tree). prowehewe ke ya thotho pe motorewe thapou tharei, the pe kãi waruhou si ihehewe.

to wear out, to become worn out (by friction). waruhou.

to throw down, to drop from above. kemai.

I eat in the forest. Uu krooko pei.

to eat. krooko.

to buzz. reããmou.

until the extremities of the axes of the people of the macaws were damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

the extremity was damaged. hãyokomãpi.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to hold or brandish something above one. yareherei.

they (they two) made the woman work telling her to grate manioc. nashi hi ha suwe a ohotamopii re shoatariyowei.

they made her work grating manioc. ohotamopii.

he went to see another path. ai yo re miãkeiwei.

to go to see. miãkeiwei.

they split up after a dispute over a woman. suwe ke a nowã hã the pe shekeroma.

the reason for which, the cause of. shekeroma.

go to harvest Indian cane leaves. komishi hena ta tirire.

carry it on your back. the ta yehire.

he carried it on his back. tirire.

tomorrow you will give me a gift. h enaha yare huko sheyeape.

to give a gift. huko sheyekei.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we constructed shelters for passing the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

to construct a temporary shelter for passing the night. perimoma.

to become frayed, to unravel. thauweshi.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we constructed shelters for passing the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

to construct a temporary shelter for passing the night. perimoma.

the food of the "Whites" makes you impotent. nape pe niini wamaki ha moyepirini.

they make you impotent. moyepirini.

a long line (in silence). prihãprou.

to tear into pieces, to shred (durative or plural object). rehihamai.

I whistled (to call someone). ya husi heãmoma.

he was swinging in his hammock whistling between his teeth. the husi heã kãi wãri yãteyãtemoma.

to whistle (to call someone). heãmoma.

the hekura launched the snake very far from downstream, they launched it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

they launched it over everything towards me. morokãimaiwehei.

to clear up for a moment. hirahatou.

he is wet. a here.

wet. here.

vine. bejuco.

to buzz. ururumou.

fragment, break into pieces, reduce to small pieces. remakashimai.

nighthawk, whip-poor-will (bird species). makoayomi.

I was going quickly to reach them. rope ya pe nosi hurirema.

to reach someone quickly. hurirei.

to become slightly reddish, to turn reddish. teãyãrãyou.

measure out the same amount of tobacco for each one. pee nahe wa ha owerarini.

measure, count (several quantities). owerarini.

to become blind. hupepiprou.

to acquire an oblong shape; to elongate a little. toroherariyo.

to scream in pain. hiyohiyomo.

to succeed rapidly. notinotimorãyou.

He took the placenta where the two twins were and hid them immediately. rró la placenta donde estaban los dos gemelos y los escondió en seguida.

take. rró.

I provoked the return of the hekura people. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

to cause to return, to force to retrace one. tomarei.

he listens. he aharai.

to listen, to lend an ear. aharai.

It is believed that this (lizard) enters the anus of sleepers to eat their liver. sherereamo.

a very dangerous wãrihotho demon will lodge in the body of a beautiful Yãnomãmi. yãnomãmi riyehewe ke the rii ha wãrihotho wãritiwe ke a niya shatio totihia kure (cha.

a dangerous supernatural malefic being that lodges in the body of the sick. wãrihotho.

be attentive while walking. a ta moyaweaheri.

to become prudent, attentive. moyaweprou.

to be hungry. mohehã.

we shot arrows at them and they cried: "hokiã. the ha niyakini : "hokiã. hokiã. hokiã. ". ", e pe kuma.

alarm cry. hokiã!.

Pájaro carpintero enano se aferró al bejuco de curare y le dio picotazos (que se escucharon). mamokori ira ke a yaupe ha ripuhusiwe a ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

to peck, to strike repeatedly with a beak. yaupe.

I will destroy your back with the destructive fire of my axe. ei ipa fãyokorã ani, ayawa koshi wakeni, pe kofesi yafathoprarei.

I will destroy your back with the destructive fire of my axe. yafathoprarei.

where he had spit out tobacco juice mixed with saliva while walking, tobacco plants sprouted. the pe shuu kreshaheripe hami pee nahe kushuu huprariyoma.

flowers that fall from a tree in the process of flowering. shuu.

to grow, develop a little (plant). tirerou.

you are hairy. wa koi.

to get under, to go down, to sink. koi.

I put them side by side. ya the erekekei.

to lie side by side, to place side by side. ere-.

I'm going to attack them (lit. ya pe yãnopi ta mii sho.

to attack them (lit.: to go to see their house). fyãnopi.

the water that has remained in a container for a long time always makes me feel nauseous. hote u peni ya kamishi yoruhou tharei.

to feel nauseous. yorurayou.

to force an object into a too narrow opening (and get it stuck). hokoãmai.

I stopped taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

I stopped doing something; I gave up doing what I used to do. tiraarema.

he shot at an object used for a specific purpose. miha niyãkini shereka a hãkema: le disparó a un pajaepenaye.

an object used for a specific purpose. pajaepenaye.

1. Vine ring, placed around the ankles for climbing trees. 2. Package containing food intended to be cooked over the coals.. hãrohãroma.

the pasarela sank under the water when I crossed it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

soak the wapu fruits. wapu ki he ta paoku.

to be submerged, to submerge, to cover with water, to soak. paoai.

you will remember this. wa puhi hatukeope.

to remember, to recall. hatukemai.

he descended again (along the tree trunk). the ithoa theri ha kothoherini.

sit (at the foot of the tree, the speaker is perched on it). a ta rotho.

to descend, to go down. kothoherini.

can I enter. ya ta haa.

can I enter?. haa?.

the man went in company with the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). thapoimi kutaeni.

to mix, intermingle different objects. thapoimi.

to be a little firm, to be slightly hard. hihutiwe.

to carry objects from a canoe or water to land. washiri.

I will make a cotton ball and take it, you will ask for it. ya nathe fa thaprarini, ya nathe kãi fa yaﬁrini, wa nakouwe.

to have eggs in the abdomen. fa nathe.

the hen wants to lay eggs. kakara a nathe ihe.

egg. nathe.

Bottom of a burrow. ka he kohoã.

bottom of a burrow. kohoã.

to hold firmly, to sustain with firmness. rohothopou.

to hold firmly, to sustain with firmness. rohothopou.

ya pucia de una formas derivadas, modales u otras, caracterizadas por un mismo condicionamiento fonológico. the koo waikiokema ke tao.

to be afraid. ãkãthãmiki.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

to feed someone a malefic substance (heri) mixed with food; to feed a hekura offering ami u. shapokonayomani.

to get one's face painted. mi yakirao.

to get one. yakirao.

to get a tonsure. hoãmou.

the forest smelled good. fnini tiweheo hi a ni kreterioma.

to smell good, to perfume. kreterioma.

to be very hungry. sokasokami.

to have a kinship relation as an uncle or father-in-law to a woman. thathemou.

to move away, to distance oneself. kasiprou.

they had set out on the path, and it was then that Hoo fell in front of him. the pe ha huoproherini, hoo ke pe keoprou mi paoma.

a supernatural being that lurks in the forest, taking the appearance of a close relative to lure victims. foo.

he had caught fish and was carrying the bundle on his back. yuri e ki yokerarema e hãro ha yehireni.

to catch several fish. yokerarei.

I was moving hesitantly. kekou kuaaherima.

to hesitate, to vacillate (once). wekekeai.

to be annoyed, to be a little angry. hushuhutou.

(it) speaks of the south of the Orinoco: the sun inclines towards the horizon. the misi pata yahatotoherii.

the sun inclines towards the horizon. yahatotoherii.

to tie quickly. okãokãi.

to grow hair again in the place of the tonsure. yoothai.

to be habitually prohibited. ãyotamai.

We are hekura with bead necklaces around our chests, and we go towards you. tope u harehatimi yamaki te huope ye.

with bead necklaces. harehatimi.

those who sing saying yau kwã kwã kwã. ei ki re yaukuwemouwei.

piapoco (people). yaukuwemo.

to feel fatigued (in a general way and without a specific reason); to feel tired. wãrihipariyo.

to fan a fire. koa wake hora.

to make a fire. yãimo.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I thrust the point into the shaft and sat down next to the fire of my son-in-law. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi- ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to approach one another to confront in combat, to thrust or insert forcefully by supporting with the hand. tisuai.

to redden locally by the action of the sun. heteteai.

Translation:. tori ke pe.

pulular. rãtãrãtã.

to offer a portion of meat. wahakewemi.

to call someone, to receive visitors. horomorayou.

they had placed themselves one next to the other and Macagua was directing them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to dig repeatedly in the ground or earth to make the hole wider and deeper. theiakei.

lie here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

lying in opposite directions (with the head next to the feet of the other) in a hammock. yoteiku.

do not attack us. y a m areki thaamatihe.

do not attack us. thaamatihe.

the tapirs were coming swimming in the river one after the other. shama pe pata karei nomihou kupariyoma (cha.

since Terewe's son pronounces my personal name in public, I will pronounce his in turn. terewe ihirupini ware si re poape, ya si poai ta nomihio.

to do in turn, to succeed, to relieve. nomihi.

to walk at a certain distance from the others. prithothou.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to reach the summit. pororoprou.

as his hunger for meat was insatiable, Jaguar returned and ate his son. ira pe ihirupi re a waa mi yaparema, naiki oweheproimi.

to recover, to regain consciousness (after taking hallucinogens). yaparema.

to squeeze against each other. hisiniprou.

the ancestors were not afraid to engage in unusual acts. pata the ki heonomi ta no totihiopereshini (mit.

the ancestors set out. patapi ke the pe kuaai ta totihiopereshi (mit.

not to hesitate, not to be afraid (to do unusual or strange things, to engage in extraordinary or surprising activities). totihiopereshi.

to take something in its entirety. haikirei.

I only take a dose of the yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi ya ki ayaai.

1. To take only a part of a whole; to collect a part of something and keep the rest for later; to consume something, or to collect the fruits of a tree, partially. 2. To find, discover before others; to notice immediately.. ayaai.

some had already finished placing the horizontal rods for the lower part of the future dwelling. ai peni hãto nahi shikã rereamai waikiomahe.

you all had already left, why didn't you tell me. ai pe pruka kua waikia, wamaki kunomi.

they had already finished/completed (something). waikiomahe.

to divide a piece of meat or a wad of tobacco into many parts, to offer them. hakokoakei.

that is what we intend to do and that is the reason why we leave you here. ei naha re pe niya ha thapramani, pusi pe thapi heipou ma re kui.

to leave behind, abandon on the way. hãmipramai.

to start vibrating, to start experiencing small shakes. tirikiprou.

(habla de río arriba. mi hapre.

(speaks of upriver). hapre.

spirit associated with the tamandua (anteater). shokoriwe.

Jaguar went very far away describing circles (mythological). yahi hami a katitihu ke pe hami a yaheriatarou ha kuparuni.

to go very far away, to move away (mythological). yaheriatarou.

to be angry. ãikã.

madre, voy a tumbar un árbol apia, he construido un andamiaje (alrededor, para montarme encima). nape, apia ke ya hi tiyeherayou, apia ke ya hi mathakari thakei kuroi.

perforar, asestar, enterrar, fijar, pinchar, arponear, dar una cuchillada, golpear con una lanza. tiweheai.

broken into several pieces (plural object). hatakarariyo.

to obtain several times followed two objects at a time. yãhuyãhumai.

the two small partridges gathered a hardened and deformed caterpillar. pi waini kasha ke a ripi prithothowe re hokepirei.

to become distorted or deformed. prihãprai.

she had put red flowers in her earlobes, and she looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

to put something in the earlobe (a stick, feathers, flowers, etc.). huureni.

to be burned, to suffer a heat stroke. frãnãpi.

brother-in-law, represent things clearly, when you achieve it, manifest your anger. shoriwe a puhi ta wararaparu, wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

to represent clearly, to recall perfectly. wararapariyo.

he placed a well-stocked cluster of pijiguaos on the load that is. wii ke a hami rasha shiko ke ki pata makerema.

to make dense and thick everywhere. shikomai.

I was terrified and lost my mind. yare puhi ha yarerini, ya puhi tao re mape.

to frighten, to drive crazy, to terrify. yarerei.

As it was raining, I planted palm leaves in the ground to shelter myself. maa a kei ha ya masikoku ithãk e m a.

to plant, to insert vertically into the ground. ithãk.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a beast that was chasing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to leave behind, to exceed (in quantity, length), to go beyond a limit. torerayou.

to execute a task quickly. puuna.

to be affected by leishmaniasis. washepi.

to roll up in a spiral; to hem, to fold the edge of something. yapuremai.

it seems that the combat staff has been smeared with heri. hii nami he ha horooni.

to be smeared/coated with heri (a plant resin). horooni.

to be clear, limpid, translucent, white; to be under someone. fherushihi.

to be completely reddened by the sun. hetetewe.

to have flaccid and hanging neck skin (bird). prehuwe.

1. Fact. of riprai (to spill a liquid by pouring). 2. To spill a liquid by distraction.. ripramai.

he imitates his father (= he behaves like his father). pe hii a owepou.

imitate, act like. pao.

to become stiff, to contract (to make an effort). hitatatou.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. ata.

sit here. a ta roikiyo.

he went quickly to hide behind the trees and immediately called the human beings. pei ke yo ha yetu ke the pata ha wariripraikiyoni, yãnomãmi the nakai shoaoma.

to go. ikiyo.

fish, bocón; Brycon spp. (Characidae). pokou.

maleficent supernatural beings of the yai the class associated with roots, they can take possession of the pei mi ãmo of the foot. nasikiri.

to pursue, to reach someone. nosi huriai.

reached someone at a specific place (perfective). nosi hurikei.

reached (perfective, plural subject). nosi huriokei.

reached (perfective of the inceptive). nosi hurirei.

to pursue, to reach. huriai.

in the place where I usually go to fetch water. mãu ya u re yakepraaiwei hami.

I serve myself cambur compote (using a gourd). tate ya u yakeai.

to go repeatedly to fetch water, to have the habit of going to fetch water at a particular place. yakepraai.

brother-in-law, for what reason should I tell them not to go to the party. shoriwe weti the ha pe rii a maihãi ma yaio.

to tell others to reject an invitation. wã maihãi.

they died one after another. nomaoprou.

to die one after another. nomaoprou.

the grease makes (one) feel like vomiting. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to feel nauseous, to feel like vomiting. harihai.

to have become white or clean locally. aushikei.

to group together, gather, join. yototo.

to stain something in a place. hayapishiam.

when the wood is wet. koã yama ãyo pe thai.

firewood. koã.

to receive a strip that has been torn. makokopei.

to remove a piece of something by breaking it, to cut something by taking a piece. akatahuai.

to groan. frãã.

to imitate (once) the cry of an animal to attract it. fãshãmi.

that they incinerate the two women one next to the other, so that I may be afraid. suwe ke wama pe wake wãri oramaparei ha, ya wãri ta kiri.

one next to the other (of people who have lived in adjacent hearths). oramaparei.

the arrow got stuck in a branch and they asked him to go get it. shereka a ha shatiikuni a nosiyemamahe: "a ta thaprari".

they asked him to do it. nosiyemamahe.

Cut the vine and don't worry about what might happen. thotho peprai ta hairo, wa puhi ha mrataruni.

I let it go involuntarily. ya imiki puhi mratariyoma.

to forget temporarily; to lose consciousness for a moment; to fall asleep for a while; to do something involuntarily; to momentarily disregard the situation one is in. thotho.

to drip continuously. poyopoyomou.

to start fabricating a slightly longer arrow than usual. tireheprai.

no. mpo.

to deeply cut someone. yakaroprai.

brother-in-law, did you already eat the wapu fruits that we (you and I) prepared. shori, wapu pehe ki re thaperei, wa ki waa waikirema.

we (you and I) prepared. waikirema.

tense bow and also it can be The word 'rahaka' in Yanomami means 'bamboo tip'. rahaka hetho.

Give me arrows with bamboo tips. rahaka hetho ta hiyoraruhe.

tense. rahaka.

perfective form. momarei.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially hollowed out the shrub trunk. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to acquire a more or less circular hollowed out mark (on a cylindrical or spherical object). esheheã.

it fragments, it breaks into pieces. remakashiai.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashi.

hang the leftovers there. shee the ta rukea kokuhe.

leftovers (of an edible product), food scraps. kokuhe.

to break into small pieces (durative, plural object). nakashimai.

to start breaking into small pieces. nakashiprai.

to break into small pieces. ragmentar.

1. to tighten a bowstring by twisting it; 2. for a bowstring to be tightened. hãto nahitha peti.

uncovered cotton. shinari uku hapresha no.

to uncover, reveal, strip (e.g. cotton fibers). hapreshe.

my wounds disappear. ya warasipi mraai.

my wounds. warasipi.

manner of shouting that. korereamou.

everyone knows that in all the places I have gone, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

start running quickly (each one in a different direction). pe ta rereo shoaomopotu.

to do the same task in different places (by multiple groups or the same subject repeatedly). -omopotayo.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake prai shoaoma, wake pata prariroma (mit.

fall one by one, scatter (fruits, flowers, etc.). prarirou.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

disappeared behind or under. shãhokema.

he will visit several communities (during his journey). a yahi no hetepraiwe.

to visit several communities during a journey. heteprai.

I am closing the mapire (tying its edges). yorehi ya si he itutuai.

they flew one behind the other. the yei tutuama.

to close a basket by bringing the opposite edges together and tying them; to put two objects in contact by inclining or bending them; to walk in a line one behind the other. tutuai.

(he) grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear off (the end of a long flexible object by pulling). huhetirayou.

they (two) proposed to make Jaguar fall. irariwe ke a kemapii puhio yaro (mit.

they (two) proposed to make fall. kemapii.

(something) sinks. mohe kaoko.

to sink in water under the weight of something. kaoko.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to disembark, to get out of a canoe or water. washiria.

(voice) to resonate. wã tihekirayou.

to rebound, to not penetrate, to slide against a hard object. tihekirayou.

to clear up for a moment. hirahatou.

the beads of the necklace that he had broken scattered. tope ke pe huhetima no yapikamama.

scattered. yapikamama.

the children were hunting small birds. ihiru peni kirithami pe niyatumahe.

generic term for small birds. piomi.

your teeth are so big (that I'm afraid). wa naki pata kuyehewemi (mit.

said of an object that is in such a state that it induces one to give up on it. kuyehewemi.

to go under the shade repeatedly, to go under the shade one after the other. ahipraai.

allá, en lo alto de la montaña abandoné a un venado. mihi, matotopiyei ha preãri ya prapei kuhe.

yo, yo meteré (para transportarlo) al venado en el hueco del lóbulo de mi oreja. kamiyeni pei ya yimikaki ha preãri ya wai huuai shoaowe.

venado (deer). preãri.

narrow. makokow.

esos dos son los únicos que comen orugas cocidas. kama ke kipini kasha ripi pe wapii ayao (mit.

orugas cocidas. wapii.

he peeled the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to peel, to remove the outer layer. roshiprou.

we climbed the mountain and reached the summit. yamaki mi re yãmopeheriiwei, yamaki mi re totoparekiriowei.

we reached the summit. totoparekiriowei.

the jaguar howled in pain and rubbed itself against the trees (to remove the tortoise that was biting its throat). ira ke a rããmorayoma, hii ke hiki hami a hãrikiãprarama.

to fry, to roast, to toast. hãrikiãrei.

The daughter of Deer carried a guatura. we theepini wii ke e re yehireiwei (mit.

Is the woman already married. wii re yaua waikirenowisha karakapi iwei.

guatura, basket. wii.

soft, tender, flexible. uhutiti.

to become sticky. husupiprou.

to start loosening something. proroprai.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

to send someone to do something; to authorize someone to take an object (perfective form). shimikei.

jo, let me descend (from your back). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit.

to make descend, to let descend (someone whom one carries on one. ithopramai.

slowly, carefully. turekai.

I placed sticks under the ugly buttocks of the (unborn) child, and Rumirumiyoma wove a basket to enclose it (= I killed the fetus in the mother's womb). kana ke hiki ha ihiru ya posi wãritiwe romaparei kurei, rumirumiyoma ihiru pei ke a pesi ha tiyeaprani.

a female spirit associated with cloudy weather and rain; she is the mother-in-law of Titiri, the demon of the night. Rumirumiyoma.

The unidentified tree is tall. Mapayawe namohi a mão.

tall. mão.

I was stringing beads. tope ya ki hiima.

to thread, to string beads. hiimai.

suwe pata: old woman. suwe pata: mujer vieja.

abandoned dwelling. fyãno suwe pata.

old woman. suwe pata.

to remain for a moment under water, to sink for a moment to the bottom of a large hammock. ohoprao.

return by the way you came. a he ta tatoru.

return by the same path, go back the way you came. tatoru.

he deposited the fire on the dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke ﬁ pata poko fewe ha, wake makekema.

to be dry (wood). hewe.

to become untied. moshokoreai.

the arrow canes pressed together. fsiki re shororimore.

arrow canes. fsiki.

to remain in a surrounding position. hãyopou.

to paint several circles on one. tipipramorayou.

ya ellos nos odian. pemareki nohi wãripou waikiwehe.

they hate us. waikiwehe.

the woman hung from a tree and, when Danta passed below, she kicked him. hii ke hi kuope ha suwe a ha yautaruni shamariwe ke a pata pepihitou tehe, suweni a kahathorema.

to kick from below. kahathorema.

the sky has cleared. the hiwatua.

to have become bright, luminous; to be clear or luminous locally. hiwatua.

during their flight the hekura left marks of their passage in the vines. hekura pe ruu tehe wãkowãko thotho rekekamahe.

to leave footprints or marks of one. rekekekei.

he just slipped under the rotten wood. rutheruthe a ha a si poiruwe kuhe.

to decompose in a specific place. rirse.

to cross in X, to arrange. pakiraai.

penetrate into very dense vegetation. paimiãherii.

I'm going to get a pot in exchange for arrows (lit. hapokaye ke ya yehiai.

to get, obtain, acquire. yehiai.

we will prepare bamboo arrowheads like these (to go to war). e naha rafaka ke pe kuwe pema pe ha kopemani.

to prepare bamboo arrowheads. kopemani.

to nibble the lower lip. fkasiki wetiwetimou.

to nibble the lower lip. wetiwetimou.

the cannibal people of the shãki nari live downstream. shãki nari a naikiri bo mi hetua kurakiri.

black bee (unidentified). shãki.

They had a rahara monster as a pet. rahara ke ki hiima pomahe.

He is already married. suwe a pou waikiwe.

They cut off the jaguar's head and took it home. ira he kãi peremahe, yahi hami he pomahe.

to have, possess, marry. po.

he was brushing against the two women who were walking with their arms around each other's shoulders. suwe ke kipi ipihiaprarope hami a pakihiapraroma.

to be hanging from the shoulder. ipihou.

testicles. Yãno-.

to tie something by winding it around itself repeatedly. ãtetemou.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness; to lose all point of reference, to get confused, to not recognize oneself. shiwãrihiãi.

God created us. Tio ɨpɨtɨawɨ kamɨ.

God. tio.

to paint, trace a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch once transversely. tiprutuai.

he just slipped under the rotten wood. rutheruthe a ha a si poiruwe kuhe.

to decompose in a specific place. rirse.

his spouse was transformed into stone, with his arrows placed against him. pe heãropi pei ke ma kuprou waikirayouwei ha, shereka ke ki ha waririmareni.

to store long objects next to each other, or to place them in that way. wariripou.

he does not grow fast. a preprao haiomi.

to have a strong desire to sleep. fmaharishi preprou.

to feel the effects of a substance strongly. fwayu preai.

to grow, to develop; to increase, to intensify; to enlarge, to widen (a cavity). preprao.

(example sentence fragment). mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yeteprai.

to grab something quickly with a gesture, to put one. yeteprakei.

evil people associated with this clay. kroakroari.

I thought suddenly. pensé yo de repente.

I thought suddenly. hãi.

to crumble, to collapse, to disintegrate. hashishiai.

to be painted with oni haheti wavy or sinuous lines. foni eyekewe.

to be painted. eyeke.

blue jay, azure jay; Cyanocorax violaceus (Corvidae). piyawa namo.

you seem to be brave (lit. wa nami kiriimi.

to be brave, to be fearless. kiriimi.

valency. valencia.

eructar. epreteãmou.

to desatize. fkoa wake rãikipei, perf.

to desatize. rãikipei.

to have been slit incompletely, to be emptied. ekokoa.

he undid the knots that held the vines of his hammock in place. thoo thoku he kushesheprarema.

my older brother comes to me and lies down in my vine hammock. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

hammock made of vines. thothoku.

to dry (plural objects); to protect from rain. wehetimai.

habla del sur del Orinoco. rahaka shiiwe.

syn. sin. hii theri therimi: set of beings (humans, supernatural beings, animals or plants) associated with a particular object or environment. hii theri therimi: conjunto de seres (humanos, seres sobrela naturales, animales o plantas) asociados a un objo o medio determinado.

fmaa ma t h e r i m i: hekura that live in the rocks. fmaa ma t h e r i m i: hekura que habitan en las rocas.

pookosi fyahi therimi: set of members of nearby communities born by fission from the same original local group. pookosi fyahi therimi: conjunto de miembros de comunidades cercanas nacidas por ﬁsión de un mismo grupo local original.

community. therimi.

my sons-in-law offered me pieces of ice. siyoyahe the peni preyura repe kãi re hiyorariyowei.

they offered me. siyoyahe.

there many váquiros (a type of fish) gather. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

1. To fill up to the brim. 2. To become numerous (living beings). manikiai.

it was him who held my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to hold something down with pressure from above, to keep something submerged by placing a weight on top of it. patete.

to scratch several times. hukekerarei.

to imitate (once) the cry of an animal to attract it. hãshãmirei.

he went over there to examine the paths. kihami pei ke yoka pe horea miãprarama.

to move around looking carefully around oneself, to search for something in that way. miãprarai.

to harvest tobacco leaves. pee nahe yeri.

to stay for a long time. poushokutao.

to have felt nauseous. harihipariyo.

(he/she) hung the ripe plantains. kuratha ke ki wake re yaumakeiwei.

to hang, to suspend. auamai.

brother, don't be angry. ã iwe, a hushuotihe.

don. hushuotihe.

those ripe bananas, give them to me so that I can try them. the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa.

dim red light of a flashlight with low batteries. ushi fsh wake.

the tender pulp of a fruit (for example, the pulp of the milky fruit that adheres to the shell). wãkekãi.

I am the song of the passing Yoreshiãriwe Spirit. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope ye.

I already spoke to the women, I told them: "cry for the dead, cry for the dead". suwe ya pe nowã thaa waikirei kuhe, "pe ta ãmoãmo, pe ta heri".

to sing, to hum, to cry for the dead (euphemism). ãmoãmou.

what can be eaten by biting or scraping with the incisors. wãkekãmou.

do not get up from your hammocks, do not go out. pe upraatihe, pe horeotihe.

do not get up, do not go out. upraatihe.

to poke someone's eye with a fingertip. mamo hipipei.

eye. mamo.

sostente bien o te vas a caer. wa ha rohothoikuni wa wãri keru.

to fall. keru.

to be loose, slack. prayuku.

to shave one. mãrokoshiprou.

do not speak in a low voice, so that I can hear your voice when I am asleep. opi yare ãhã wayoai mai, pe ã he tharerei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

I saw a specter in a dream. pore ya he tharerema.

the effect of hallucinogens. he tharemai.

to hold with the hand, to transport an object holding it with the hand. humimapou.

look at me. a mi ta yaitaru.

to turn one. thatou.

hace mucho que nos peleamos por primera vez, están desafiando. yetu ha ke yaheki thayou parioma, pe pe ã nosi ahiaimi.

to provoke, to challenge. ahiaimi.

not long ago they came to widen the entrance of the den of the baba. iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

to start widening the entrance of a den. tishiprai.

the spider monkeys move through the trees. hii pe hami pasho pe imii.

to walk, keeping balance, one after the other. imii.

(a fire) extinguishes. koa wake misi ruaai.

to extinguish (a fire). ruaai.

Jaguar se puso lentamente de cuclillas. irariwe ke a ha roaruni.

Jaguar se soltó y cayó. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni, a kea shoarayoma.

Jaguar no lograba ya abrazar el tronco del árbol y se desesperó. irariwe ke pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma.

el demonio (que tumba a la gente dándole puntapiés) justo acababa de terminar un andamiaje alrededor de un enorme algarrobo, cuando llegó Jaguar. kãrãnãri ãro kohi pata yotoharimai tutoonowei ha, irariwe ke a pata waroo ha heparuni.

Jaguar (a mythological ancestor). irariwe.

to curve an object, to give it the shape of an arc. payokamai.

supernatural being associated with lightning. thãhirãwe.

to have done/completed something in a specific place. ushikei.

I walked slowly, without being afraid. kirii mai ya hutaariyoherima.

he ate without hurrying. a mepe yimirama.

he never hunts. pee nahe ha tihirutaarini.

implies an impossibility, can be translated as . taare.

(he/she/it) perforated. ka horaprou.

the dress is perforated. iro siki ka horaa.

to make a hole, to perforate. ka hora.

to extinguish (a fire). ãkikiãm.

he is probably still there. a shoapiyei ke the.

he is probably still there. shoapiyei.

the morada of Yotenama had become silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

what terrible voice is that. weti the ã no kiria kurawe.

sound, noise. kahiki*.

to submerge an object. kapirosiai.

Murciélago fue a agarrarse de un algarrobo muy alto. ã r o kohi yashokootayope ha heweriwe ke a wãri re sutiketayonowei.

he went to hang himself. sutiketayonowei.

(pei). hitho.

to begin to feel fear. kiriprou.

the rock leaned slowly towards the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki rakiariyoma.

while we were sitting, the sun moved slowly to this place in the sky. heyeha mothoka wai kuariyo iha re yamaki roo heai shoao t e h e.

to do something slowly, without haste. taariyo.

the siparariwe fish are full of bones. siparariwe pe niosipi.

to be full of fish bones. niosipi.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age). eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

if you do. eri.

to fall or slip like. tiikiprou.

to begin to surpass (in height). torehai.

it is because I observed the place where you fought. wamaki wetiayope ha ya mamo shatikema kutaeni.

the place where you fought. wetiayope.

to register, to wake up. moyaweai.

while Danta was perched (on a branch), everyone started climbing. shamariwe ke a pata ha tikeparuhuruni, komi the pe tuoma.

to be gaining height while climbing. tupeherii.

(upstream talk): —Do you complain that you lack tobacco. herãmi pe sherekapi au (mit. —Yes. ) (habla de río arriba.

to be white, to be clean. au1.

why did they make him enter the hole. weti the ha a rukemapirei kuhe.

to make someone enter a hole. rukemapirei.

to repair a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakai.

during the displacement the men mixed with the women (to protect them). suwe pe rii hami wãro ke the komi re nikererayoma.

to mix or join with people from another community (due to a special circumstance). ninioni.

he will squat down below, he will spit out the pathogenic principle. fei kitato ke ki peﬁthe ha, fei faye a re perire.

to squat down below. pehi ho.

(children or women chant this to make the rain stop). prararaiku, prararaiku.

to diminish in intensity (the rain). prararaai.

he went over there to examine the paths. kihami pei ke yoka pe horea miãprarama.

to move around looking carefully, to search for something in that way. miãprarama.

to go around. kayerikayeri.

the horseflies have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahou.

to burn carelessly. hisiki.

it is digging, that one who never sees the light of day (the armadillo). ei the wai re tithare a he wai haruu re maore.

to dig with the front or hind paws (an animal with claws). tithare.

to leave leftovers, to keep leftovers for oneself. sheeprai.

to have one. haotokei.

to take a pinch of. rishiãi.

to feather an arrow. shereka he haoapei.

the cotton with which arrow feathering is attached. shinari shereka pe he re haomamouwei.

to feather an arrow. haoapei.

stepped on the ground with his foot (to have luck during his search). snudó el suelo con el pie (para tener suerte durante su búsqueda).

stepped on the ground. snudó.

upon arriving he stuck his machete (in a post). kama e siparapi shatia shoamapeheroma.

to stick or insert something upon arriving. shoamapeheroma.

así dijo Tucán. mayepirithawe a kuu shoapariyoma (mit.

designates a hekura or a mythical ancestor. -rithawe.

to appear for a moment on the water surface. poketou.

to drink. wakaroarei.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short log. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokoremai.

he cut a short stick and put it as an extension (of a branch). horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tikemakema.

to put a short stick as an extension (of a branch). peprarini.

to make deep, to deepen (a cavity). koeheprou.

the dog chased the tapir. hiimani shama ke a nosi tereherima.

you who are there, go with your dog to kill agoutis. miha kaheni poshe ke ki ta shema hiimahe ke a wãri iha.

dog, pet animal. hiima.

to carry leftovers home. sheerei.

to scrape one's tongue with a vine (to remove residue). aka hoprai: rasparse la lengua con un bejuco (para retirar adherencias).

to scrape one. aka hoprai.

he still had the glans uncovered (in the woman's sex), it was like a hook stuck in the fleshy mouth of a guabina fish. the moka wãri wakataatima, hawe ishawaritomi uhea a weipou kuo totihioma.

to have in the mouth or snout. weipou.

to move around - 1 intransitive verb: yaokoai, incomplete: to move around the village. yaoko 1 vb.

to move around. yaoko.

I want to eat meat. ya re naikare. I will go fishing and drink the fish broth. yuri ke ki re titire ya ki ha rekani, ya ki pouku ta koapra.

I want to eat meat!. naikare!.

belongs to the taxonomic system of plants. nathoshi.

to make an object fall by throwing another object at it, to make an arrow fall from a tree by throwing objects at it. tishishiprai.

resist the penetration of a sharp or cutting instrument. touku.

hey kids, have fun, dance. ihiru pe, pe ta iriamohe.

have fun, dance. iriamohe.

tree. karapa.

he woke up. moka* wakataai.

to wake up. moka*.

there, on the other side (of the river) another mountain stands upright. kiha ai ke a pata hehu upraa re pekatuowei.

to stand upright, to be erect. pekatuowei.

long object that can be cut into pieces. tihetipramou.

to cut the end of a long object (applying a downward blow with a sharp object). tiheti.

to have filled up to the brim (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). manikirayou.

the people of Hukowe invited us. hukowe theri peni pemareki nakai kuprehei.

the people of Hukowe. Hukowe.

(upriver speech). ikrã.

to push towards the center of the fire to revive it. tikukuk.

"you have had a slip of the tongue", this is the news that I will truly spread. "wa aka tihekia re yaipe", a wãno wã thaprai yaia kutaeni.

to make a slip of the tongue, to have a lapse. tihekiai.

to add ashes quickly to the hallucinogenic yopo. hitihitimai.

I was moving away a lot. ya payekama.

to move away quickly. payekai.

it is said of a pijiguao (palm tree) that is pushing me down. ikrekeai.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense (bows). iyoararini.

keep closed. fraapou.

to keep closed. fraapou.

the cunaguaro died there, only its bones remain. kihami ira ke a nomarayou no kureshi, pei ke u pe shiro hiraa kurarei.

jaguar. cunaguaro.

no, no hablen así, ustedes mujeres, dejen de tratarnos de cobardes. maa, e naha pe kutihehe, suwe pe, yamare kiriaprai he prakehotihehe.

to shame, to embarrass. kirihiprai.

when you achieve clarity, content yourself with threatening (without acting, out of cowardice). wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

represent clearly, recall vividly. wararaparu.

I don't believe at all that you will stop wanting to eat meat, that's why I object. wamaki naiki mraaV.

to persist in refusal. wãrekoshãmi.

to be absent, to leave. haikou.

another name given to Thunder. watawatariwe.

he insisted on calling me again and then I had a desire to accompany him. yare nakai he yatioma, ya ohotatariyoma.

to have a desire for something one did not previously want. ohotatariyoma.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisiai.

there are bunches of plantains in the conuco. hikari hekura theka hami kuratha pe yarorowe.

to be hanging upside down; to exist (speaking of bunches of plantains or peach palms). yarorowe.

to be near. poushoku.

Bachaco did not return until the afternoon. koyeriwe weyate a shiro kotããma.

to arrive habitually at a certain time or under certain circumstances (always the same). kotããma.

to have finished doing something. shikopirayou.

families. familias.

to be hungry. howapayama.

he let his arrows mold. kama e ki shereka rohomarema.

to let mold (through negligence). rohoromarei.

when they hesitate at the beginning of a song, then they continue in the same way. ãmoã ihi wãisipi a ora huhetaihe tehe ihi re a huhehuhemai shoamouhe.

to hesitate, to waver, to falter. huhetai.

he has stopped breathing (he is dead). a herekou mrat a r i y o m a.

breathe. herekou.

unfortunately, it just disappeared. a wãri mraa re tikoruherihe.

disappear. tikoruherihe.

stand over there. heyeha a ta kuiku.

(the dog) was over there when it fell silent. heyeha ke pe matha waitou totihirayou kuroi.

over there (at a certain distance from the speaker, upriver). feyeha.

to buzz, to hum. ururumo.

my mother-in-law pretends that the wapu fruits are (still) hard. yayeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai.

my mother-in-law. yayeni.

bad shooter. nimri.

a jaguar was about to devour us. irani wamareki mori waaprai kuhe.

to make someone eat, to allow someone to eat, to let someone eat. waamarei.

he staggers. he wahohoai.

to stagger. wahoho.

I fold the loincloth in two. wayuko ya ki shãkoprai.

to fold in two. shãkoprai.

scarlet macaw. mãrãkã.

to have started to experience muscle pains. hayeherirariyo.

I crushed the wasp between my fingers. kopina ya na hutikiprarema.

to crush, squash, mash (by sliding fingers against each other). ãhu.

I look for an instant. ya miprao.

Titiri was perched, at the moment when he had his tail towards the ground, Horonami shot him with a poisoned dart. titiri a rooma, e teshinaki pata ithãprao tehe horonamini a horaprarema (mit.

give me that ripe one quickly so that I can taste it. mihi wake the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa (mit.

you know very well that it doesn't dry quickly (the tobacco) (= drying tobacco requires a lot of work). the pe kãi ma re heprao haio mai.

indicates an event, act or state that lasts a short time; can also indicate an action that is executed without delay. pomoprao.

hurry up in lighting the fire. wa wake ha yetarini.

hurry up in lighting the fire. yetarini.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

builds. construye.

it is damaged, it is lost. wãrimo u.

to be damaged, to be lost. wãrimo-.

to strike someone on the head, on the back, in that manner. tuyepei.

cheek. ukaremo.

I was running when I stopped. ya rererani ya upratariyoma.

indicates that two actions or events occur together or one after the other. rererani.

spider monkey banana (variety). kuratha pasho.

spider monkey. pasho.

that they give him a funerary gourd without ceremony. e watoshe he yohomai ta perahe.

funerary gourd. watoshe.

his eyes are very red, also their faces are. pei ke the mamo wake no kirii, ihi e naha the moheki kuwe.

face, visage. mofeki.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekeai.

to kill a man with a flat object during a raid. makeheprai.

tree of the Lauraceae family. shirimahi.

go quickly to pluck the roof leaves (to prevent the fire from spreading). kiha yaa ke mishiki ukukuprai ta hairo.

to grab or pluck (repeatedly). ukukai.

to touch everything, to be always grabbing other people. tiherou.

I advance slowly, without making any branch creak. opisi re ya huu, ya krihimou mai ke the.

slowly. opisi.

leaves of tobacco in the fields: it is a sign that the plant is vigorous. ushuhai.

to go ahead of someone. hetuamai.

if only I could drink fresh water. ya the u ha koarini.

if only there was a stream of water nearby and also it can be The word 'ya' in Yanomami means 'I, me'. pei the u aheteprao ha yairini.

each time I lose my appetite and also it can be The word 'ya' in Yanomami means 'my'. ya iyai mohitou si ihehewe.

he will go behind the dwelling. hei ya shikãpi re rere hami.

if. ya.

I have acid regurgitations. ya epreteãpi ni nashiwe.

to have acid regurgitations (in a lasting way). epreteãpi.

"while they roll down here, I will kill them". "eyeha ke pe wãri kahehou tehe ya pe waikai totihiowe".

1. To slide along. 2. To let oneself slide down a slope, to roll (plural subject).. kahehou.

Paint my face red with annatto dye. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint one. momihio.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

to be wrinkled. rukurou.

to have the back arched. fkohesi yãprekewe.

to have an arched back. yãprekewe.

while we walked following the ridge, some went to look for plantains. yamaki ha hesikarini ai peni kuratha a nape ayouhe.

following the ridge. hesikarini.

many arrow cane stems were intermingled. shereka pe re yãﬁrimoperei.

to cross, to intermingle in large quantities; to cross and mix in all directions. yãhirãi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). toki.

I stirred the cambur compote several times. tate ya uku yakoretaama.

to stir circularly, to remove damaged part of food by making circular incision, to remove hot food from boiling water by stirring liquid in a circle. yakore-.

ceremonial dialogue. ware.

she kept laughing because her insides were tickling her. a ikãpraroma, a hushomi ha shikioni.

to cause tickling or itching sensations. shikioni.

headdress of the hekura, similar to the stars. watoshe shitikari.

while they were crying for the death of the dog. a no miã potiihe tehe.

to cry. potiihe.

to get better, to improve, to recover (physically or mentally). totihitaprou.

to become soft (certain substances, certain fruits). prehepiai.

¿han terminado ustedes de pintarse el cuerpo. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

pero, ¿a dónde se han ido ellos. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

¿los has encontrado. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

madre, ¿les has ofrecido carne (a los visitantes). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

perfective verb form. RV2.

the Female-toucan with the pubis pululant with lice. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

Female spirit associated with the toucan. mayepiriyom.

Jaguar's cannibalistic hunger awoke when he ate the placentas of the newborns. ihiru re pe nosikini ira a naiki shurukoma.

to awaken, manifest (desire for meat or fish). shurukoma.

he went to get worms in a place where there were many rocks, he also got a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

a place where there were many rocks. hothothomope.

he sent the one who was alert to live on a rock. a puhi re moyawei iha, pe shimai piyekou ha kuparuni.

to send someone somewhere; to return someone (to their home). moyawei.

an enormous anaconda was rising on its back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei (mit.

back, loin muscles. uprarayouwei.

when omãyãri stops I go ahead of the upraoni, I go ahead of them. omãyãri ke a ha upraoni ya no mãyo hãii mi ha paoni, ya no mãyo yai thaapraramai (cha.

supernatural beings associated with the rainbow and epidemics; what characterizes them is bitterness. upraoni.

to be dry and hard locally. yihitia.

to have a swollen leg. shekekeai.

to gnaw, chew slowly (the tip of a long and resistant object to break it). weyata.

the cause of the diversity of birds. nte.

to be angry. taitai.

to remain for a moment under water, to sink for a moment to the bottom of a large hammock. ohoprao.

spirit associated with the Nyctibius bird (a nocturnal bird related to owls and nighthawks). wayahororiwe.

my mother-in-law pretends that the wapu fruits are hard to roast on the coals. yãyeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai thai.

mother-in-law. yãyeni.

the young Yãnomãmi do not know how to follow a trail, they are incapable of approaching (their enemies), they will not know how to approach them. pei yo pe kãi nosi pou taomihe, yãnomãmi ihirutawe the ikuo mai ke the, the prakepramai totihio mai ke the.

to get close to, to approach (usually to attack). prakepramai.

to have eaten meat or fish. naikarayou.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

the beverage of the yawari. yawari uku.

I. uku.

horn. t.

horn. t.

the herd of cattle is near here. ahetepara ware ke ki hiraa kure.

now it is truly close. yamaki komii kooma, pe the komii ahetetariyo kurei.

to approach, to get closer. cawe.

to quickly unravel, untwist, or unthread. kusheshetai.

(he/she/it) has been panting. hereheremorayou.

to breathe rapidly, to pant. herehere.

Bellucia grossularioides and Bellucia axinanthera (Melastomataceae). orona.

I make a ring with the vine. thoo ya thotho motoreprai.

to entwine; to form a circle or ring. otoreamai.

they are not many. pe peheriami.

not being many. peheria.

I have touched it in various places. ya huperarema.

I have touched it in various places. huperarema.

people installed in different homes at the back of a dwelling. shikãprawe.

let's eat now. hei tehe pemaki ta iya.

he just left. hei tehe a hurayoma.

now, immediately; from now on, henceforth; just now. hei tehe.

to turn over an eyelid (by playing). mamo kasi yoreai.

to turn over, to turn inside out. yore.

to start making something viscous or sticky. yãrekeprai.

in the center (of the fabric), where it is dense, the Spider-spirit was crouched. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

to become dense, thick, dense (in the center of something). sutaprou.

to have walked in the water. karoropariyo.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. anape.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

to insist repeatedly before someone to send them to do something; to reiterate a request several times. shimitaai.

it coils as it falls, like a large fecal mass. hawe shii the pata yorirou.

to fall in a coiled or spiral manner. yorirou.

the child is moaning. ihiru a re ãkãmiãmou.

to moan, to whimper. ãkãmiãm.

to have a boil. shããpiai.

uncles, they would not be lying. shori, pe hore pewe ma ta thawe.

same brother-in-law. fperihi.

the earth collapsed and everyone fell into the stream. mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururayoma (mit.

earth, ground, soil. mashitha.

I will transport a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

to transport a heavy load. preaprarai.

to remove a tooth from the jaw (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetirarei.

to have been deepened, to have been made deeper. koeheã.

the fragrant bark of the mãrã tree is suspended in the lobes of our ears. yamaki yimikaki no mãrãpi sina ni re huuhope ye (cha.

fragrant bark. huuhope.

when she had her first period, he deflowered her. a ha yipimoruni kathaa shoarema.

to dig, to clear weeds, to deflower. katha.

to prune, to cut branches. payoai.

the first time I only blew a little hallucinogen into you, this time I made you inhale a lot more by blowing forcefully. hapa kuwetawe ya the thatarema, hei tehe ya the hireketarema.

to blow a large amount of hallucinogens forcefully into someone. ni hireke.

to immobilize a person by holding their arms down against their body (to prevent them from committing an act of violence). yokokoãi.

he was so affected by the demons of disease that he could no longer speak (= he was so sick that he could no longer speak). aka porepi a kuoma, pruka wayuwayu ke kini a ha tereni.

demons of disease and epidemics. wayuwayu.

to become rough, coarse, grainy. ererãi.

unoccupied space inside a dwelling. hikokowe.

each time I lose my appetite. ya iyai mohitou si ihehewe.

appetite. iyai.

they sleep in the forest to harvest komishi leaves. komishi henaki waihe.

to harvest yopo (psychotropic plant). waihe.

gluttonous, voracious. wausi.

we went out of the water quickly and then, in a place where they went to eat yagrumo fruits, we found freshly cut branches. rope yamaki ha hashiripraikuni, kepo iki re wanowehei, ihi mohe yoa tute.

as he knew tobacco, he immediately knew what it was about. pee nahe tai yaia yaro e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to do something quickly or immediately. hashiripraikuni.

he was on guard and watching if the tree trembled (lit. the hi tiikou mima.

to fill up to the brim. hiekekei.

to employ manaka against a woman to make her sterile, causing her belly to sink in. wãheteãmai.

desapareceré. ya nohi mohotua totihirayou.

desapareceré. mohotua.

He enclosed (it) with branches or palms. Pesimora you.

to enclose, to protect with a fence or palisade. pesimora.

to respond immediately or to react instinctively. nokarema.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

plant. planta.

untie the canoe. kanawa a ta kusheprari.

to begin to untie. kusheprai.

the chigüires invited the butterflies to a feast. kayurifanariwe peni hurari pe shoamahe.

invite a group of people (family, community) to share food. kayurifanariwe.

snout. fusho.

to rise to a higher level. yuteheai.

to reach a medium size; to go from a large size to a medium size, to reduce in that way. proweheprou.

to rise up momentarily, to rise up for a moment. isitou.

don't insist on repeating that, that's what I'm saying. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

to insist, to persist, to be stubborn; to do something overcoming an obstacle or ignoring a contrary warning. yatiai.

to flatten it. he simitai.

to flatten, to make flat and smooth. simitai.

it is heavy. a hute.

heavy. hute.

the bird horãma (that accompanies their breaths) has just sung. horãma ke e wãri kutariyoma.

a type of bird. horãma.

the thunder roars in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to crackle, to rumble (the fire), to roar (the thunder); to be always arguing. frãrãrãmou.

we regrouped and slid down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

it made the tragavenado fall dead into the water. mã u re u ha hokoto keki pata nomawe nihoroã shoamaparema.

to slide down an incline, to slide into water from the bank; to dive in. nihoroo.

a small recent vine hung where Rabipelado had taken refuge. nãro a re titia totihiawei ha, ihami thoo ke e thotho wai tuku re wariripeheriiwei.

to take refuge. wariripeheriiwei.

to have filled up to the brim (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). manikirayou.

when the antepasados perforated the ground, the water (that gushed out) fell in the place where Thunder is, there where Thunder lives there is a vast expanse of water. no patapi peni u re tiwehaiwehei yãru ihami u keketayoma, yãru ihami ai u motu paa (mit.

do you know Thunder. yãru wa tai kure. how is his head. weti naha ke he kuwe.

Thunder. yãru.

I'm feeling better now, my health continues improving little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to improve after an illness; to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). hereherayou.

come, you will defend us. hapohe, wamare nohi peyeap e.

to defend, to protect, to come to the defense of someone. peyeap.

to recover after being seriously ill. horuprou.

to descend several times in a row from the hammock. ãthomou.

son (when I initiate a novice) and he, under the effect of hallucinogens, loses his reason (and is unable to respond to me), then I gather a large amount of hekura and show them to him, I gather them in a herd and send them towards him. pusi pe the shi wãri waikia ha, ihi re ya pe komi yototoa ha shoamaparini, pei ya the he tharea ha pemaparini, iha ya pe komi yototopraamai re kupariyowei.

to show, grant a teaching to a person under the effects of a hallucinogen (during a shaman. shoamaparini.

(mythological example). ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to do it quickly. pusutai.

the body was heard falling. the tereimoma.

when it falls to the ground unconscious or dead. tereimoma.

over the other slope (of the hill). fai the tiwaro ha.

to dig a hole. theka tiyei.

to be situated at a medium height (of a hill or mountain); to sew, stitch, braid, tie together with vines the elements that make up a basket. tiye.

the horrible noise that the demon omãyãri's cord makes as it moves through the air is barely heard. omãyãri yai the ãsithaki no pata re kiriparuhe, kihami ãmomiã pata yei re piyekope ye.

faint noise, barely perceptible. kiriparuhe.

Was it when going to what community that someone took my footprint (to perform black magic with it). weti theri pe rii ha ya ta fuprei yare mãyo wãfã terare ma ta sihe ke.

to take the footprint, to take the earth that was stepped on by someone in order to perform sorcery and cause illness and death. terare.

I will soon beget a child. ya ihirupi thao ropaope.

I will soon beget a child. ropaope.

to get better, to improve, to recover (physically or mentally). totihitaprou.

(he) climbed the tree using a scaffold, then went to hunt. we oi ke a yotoharimai peshekuai tehe, nãroni a horaprar.

to place a pole between two trees to pass from one to the other; to construct a scaffold in a tree whose trunk is too large to climb. yotoharimou.

the ripe plantain smelled good, he cut several pieces with his incisors and ate them quickly in that way, finishing it. kuratha a ni kreteri ha a ha weheriararini, a mi watherema.

to eat quickly in that way. weheriararini.

to feel unwell. tharehou.

The hekura have renounced living in my body, they have abandoned me. ware tiraatarai waikiomahe, tira no ke ya.

to abandon a task that cannot be completed well. tiramai.

in the place where there is a very small conuco, an enormous cluster hangs from a palm that has the base twisted. hei the re patirahari hami, si koro re toyekere ha si hami, ei ke ki pata.

twisted at the base. toyekere.

when I sleep deeply I lose all consciousness. ya mio he thareo tehe ya mohotua ma totihire re.

to sleep deeply, to have a deep sleep. thareo.

to be partially dry, to stop being locally flooded. washitikei.

the penis penetrated the tender mokoroma leaves (on which the woman was sitting). mokoroma re hena tuku ha "toso.

a type of palm plant with short stems and large leaves, of the genus Geonoma. mokoroma.

I will kick you. pe kahathorei.

And if I kick him/her. ya wãri ta kahatho sho.

to kick. kahathorei.

to disperse to do a search or hunt. rãkoko.

the woman, who was coming out of isolation after her first menstruation, walked behind. suwe a shīhīhīrī huu prihãtou hooma.

to congregate, gather. shimo.

I only managed to graze the white-lipped peccaries (with the arrows I shot at them). ware ya pe shiro si tikekerarema.

to scratch, to graze (once), to reach superficially (when shooting an arrow). tikekeai.

when there is really nothing left to eat (one wonders): "what will I feed them with. pe the pe rii no wãrowe ohei totihia: "weti ke ya the ki ta wamariwe. ", and that worries. ", the pe puhi rii thamai totihio ma re kui.

to worry, to be concerned. wamariwe.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to exchange, to swap. hemihãpii.

edible fruit of the kãyuweshirimi hi shrub. kãyuweshi.

as soon as the turtle bit sharply into its throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

1. To drink, suck (breast). 2. To bite sharply (animal, snake); to cut, break off with a sharp bite; to make regular marks with the teeth. waweh.

shoot your arrow quickly, it is going to escape. a ta niyãi ta haio, a no tokurayopi.

it is going to escape. tokurayopi.

it's no use for me to get as close as possible to the vicinity. nada vale que me acerque lo más posible al lua.

vicinity, neighborhood. lua.

to lift. empa-.

ha. he. ha. he.

laughter. hehehe.

to empty little by little. mathoko.

to crackle. shãiãmor.

they had set out on the path, and it was then that Hoo fell in front of him. the pe ha huoproherini, hoo ke pe keoprou mi paoma.

supernatural being that lurks in the jungle. huoproherini.

to name, to call. tathe.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

the night demon was perched on a branch that was bent towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma (mit.

to be curved, bent. hithoreawei.

(upriver speech) I had warned him, unfortunately he insisted on it. ya wã ma fai tehe kama re the fe prakekou tikoo kuhe.

to insist on saying something, to be stubborn. prakehe.

line up (and silently) like beans. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to line up, to align. shaninia.

to harvest honey from bees by breaking the hive into pieces. puu poprai.

to harvest honey by breaking the hive into pieces. poprai.

gather the leaves, we will scatter them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, to spread. patheriai.

to put something in the bottom of. hushomimai.

older brother, roast a green plantain to accompany the piapoco meat. ãi, mayepi a tehi ta yapa.

to accompany food (generally, but not always, a game or fish prey). tehimi.

I will not be able to. yeishitãkãrãmi.

she formed the wad without having properly passed the tobacco through the ashes (lit. riye totihiwe e nahe wãri humiprarema.

not fully cooked; to be green in a place. riyea.

to kneel. mahekoku hitheiai.

to kneel. mahekoku hithei.

small stream. yoãyoãmou.

making round, spherical (durative, plural object). komoremai, dur.

making round, spherical. komoremai.

to have a desire to inhale a hallucinogen. hoyokaki.

to place, sinking it, a bamboo tip into the shaft of an arrow. frahaka theiaprai.

to place, sinking a bamboo tip into the shaft of an arrow. theiaprai.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to have the head covered with white down. foroi.

blunted, dull. he pohotowe.

to become blunt or dull by successive impacts (arrow tip). pohotai.

a recently initiated shaman's arrow. porepore ke pe re hirapiyei hami yãnora.

arrow. hirapiyei.

I started right away to run behind the hill. ai the humomo hami ya rerea ãyoriprou re shoarayouwei.

to pass behind, to go around the back side. ãyoriprou.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain-spirit shakes the ends of the house poles. ei maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe.

keep your bow armed. nahi ta iyopou.

my son-in-law. fipa nahi.

certain objects derived from trees (the bow, posts and poles used to build the house, the house itself or a camp in the forest). naﬁki.

to keep the head extended for a certain time. hiyãhãtao.

he made the turtle slide down (and said): "come on, bite my chin. totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

made the turtle slide down from above. wetipari.

to form (a boil, abscess). yuupiai.

1. to break, split or crack (something long and rigid like a stick or bone) by striking one end against something hard; 2. something long and rigid that has been broken in that way. yatiki.

to be able to be covered, state. kahuamou.

he slid under her thighs. pei waku hami e ha horeapraroni.

to slide under the thighs. horeapraroni.

(perfective form of kapeai) found by searching with the foot, plural object. kaperarei.

I am consuming all the tobacco. pee nahe ya mraamai.

to finish, exhaust; to make disappear; to stop doing something (perfective, plural object). mramararei.

they have just gathered near here, on the hilltop. hesika ha ke pe hiraa ahetepeyoruu kuhe.

they have just gathered. ahetepeyoruu.

to have been divided into many parts, for offering. hakokorarei.

to scratch someone locally or in a precise place with an object. hikekekei.

to harbor someone in a hammock hung above another. hethãpori.

they make love (the two of them). ke kipi wamou.

to make love, to have sex. wamoma.

to extend both hands, to have both hands extended (to receive something). imiki porakao.

to extend both hands, to have both hands extended (to receive something). porakao.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved, whose opening is twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

twisted, curved. -tapari.

I did not make a mistake, I did not get tangled up (during the ceremonial speech). ya wã ma re yakei maohe, ya wã yakenomi.

to get tangled up while speaking, to make a mistake during a ceremonial dialogue. yakenomi.

he partied a short stick and put it in the prolongation. horotowe hi ha peprarini the hi tiketamapareobj.

to put in the prolongation. tiketamapareobj.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

to sharpen a stick, stake, piece of wood. namo thaprai.

to decide. namo.

something similar to the phosphorescence of fireflies has just come out. hawe amakuri ke ki wake re hetirihe (cha.

firefly, glow worm. purima.

to harvest honey from bees by breaking the hive into pieces. puu poprai.

to harvest honey by breaking the hive into pieces. poprai.

the woman that one and the other married was splendid (polyandric alliance). suwe ke a noshi hari tepiama.

Dormilona was splendid (with her attire). wathaperariwe a noshi harirao totihioma.

splendid. tepiama.

ya el calor ardiente del demonio omãyãri se difunde por mi pecho. heyoshi pakayua waikipariyo kuhe.

ardent heat. pakayua.

very early in the morning she hung the package from the hammock rope of her father (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

she hung the package from the hammock rope of her father (near the fire). pekithapi.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered by longitudinal stripes. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to be covered by longitudinal lines or stripes. shetitirahari.

to slide along. tikukuprou.

to slide along. ikuku.

Jaguar let go and fell down. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni.

to fall down. kuparuhuruni.

when I was little, they made my speech die (lit. peni yare ã oshe kashuu nomamahe.

to make die. nomamahe.

naming (him/her/it). piyekerei.

dried and hardened without rotting (a dead log). ãmãrokorãyou.

¡ay, fui mordido por una mapanare. aroami keki wãrini yare si wetia yaire hai ke.

venomous snake; Bothrops atrox (Viperidae). mapanare.

downward path. fyo mi werewe.

"the path follows the Toprai river upriver", they say. "toprai ke u ha mãyo mi yãmoã kurayoi", the pe kuu.

upriver. kurayoi.

it is my conuco (garden plot). kamiye ya hikaripi theka.

we, all of us, cut firewood. kamimiye pemakini koã pema ãsho poai.

our, ours (of all of us). kamimiye.

I wanted to do it with pleasure, but the gossip dissuaded me from doing it. itarte con gusto, pero las habladurías me disuadieron de hacerlo.

I wanted to. itarte.

do you feel the effect of the hallucinogen. wamaki pea yairihawe.

do you feel the effect of the hallucinogen?. yairihawe?.

in several places they have broken bushes by hand to mark the place where they passed, in a single place several trails cross. hii ke hi pe re keapotayouwehei, pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

to have a trail (the ground). yãshikiã.

a pole or solid bar placed between trees to allow passing from one to the other. coyetu.

I imitated the call of the gallineta bird. a wã nokaprariyoma: yo imité t horoi.

I imitated. horomireni.

upriver speech. sheishemi kona.

cicada (unidentified (animal, plant)). sheishemi.

I offer many objects. hipi tikreai.

offer many objects. tikre.

to go down (the level of a water stream). terereai.

they cured each other, then they got better. the pe nohi re reayouwei, the matha waiprapei.

to cure each other (shamans). nohi reayou.

I left the arrow at home and the women broke it in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

to leave something behind, to abandon something. tapaherini.

to twist, to bend the tip of an object. toyekeai.

they will recover the ocumo by bringing it closer with long poles. hãimãrãmi a kãi rekai piyekomahe (mit.

variety of ocumo; Xanthosoma sagittifolium (Araceae). mrakami.

the hunger torments me and I wonder what to do, I don't even have ocumo to cook. ohi pe wayu ha ya puhi wetinahamou, ohina ya moku tuai ma marani.

to have nothing. wetinahamou.

to be decorated with semicircles. parokow.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

to discern, see, distinguish clearly. hirahaprou.

to cause a child to become thin and sickly by transgressing the prohibition of having sexual relations during lactation. hayapisiamai.

to be hungry. hutumi.

they will recover the ocumo by bringing it closer with long poles. hãimãrãmi a kãi rekai piyekomahe (mit.

variety of ocumo; Xanthosoma sagittifolium (Araceae). hãimãrãmi.

we launched a cry and they did the same. yamaki rariprariyoma, kama pe ã mi wãri hetuwe.

the enemy warriors launched a cry. wayu pe rariprariyoma.

they launched a collective cry. rariprariyoma.

small circular basket. sus.

to make love (said by a man). erimo.

suwe pata pe ihirupi ke a himomai kupariyomahe (mit. suwe pata pe ihirupi ke a himomai kupariyomahe (mit. ): they invited the old woman's son to participate in a ceremonial dialogue (to make their request). ): ellos invitaron al hijo de la anciana a participar en un diálogo ceremonial (para formular el pedido de ellos).

to invite. himomai.

tree. Byrsonima.

reduce cada vez más debido a la sequía. u thoo.

reduce. thoo-.

to have a wrinkled forehead, to have a worried look. yakuku.

to be hungry, to have an empty stomach. shoetewe.

(myth): while Jaguar lay (unconscious) on the ground, they descended again. suekoruni (mit.

ground, floor. suekoruni.

río arriba y del otro lado del río es donde se encuentran los viejos conucos. hei pekaturahari ha, hei re e theka wãri pata no.

the other side (of the river or body of water). pekaturahari.

what can be mixed by stirring with the fingertips (powders). tikuramou.

it turns out that, while they were walking, they stuck the big stone perpendicularly (into the ground). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe (mit.

to plant, fix, stick in, prick; to fix an object perpendicularly to another; to hook a fishing line to the bottom. shatiamai.

we went into the water a little downriver. y amaki ithoa korohokema.

a little downriver. koroho.

call your mother and let's hurry back home. naahe ke a ta naka, pemaki koo ta haio.

mother, maternal aunt, etc.. nii.

they laid him down dead in a suspended hammock and the women carried him. no prewe a ha perimakiheni, suwe peni hiki tereherimahe.

they laid him down. perimakiheni.

she ate quickly, bringing her hands to her mouth, it is known that the picures eat quickly. wapu a ha the waruwarumoma, thomi pe iyai ma re ropewei.

to eat very quickly, placing food in the palm of the hand. waruwarumoma.

when you put your hand as a visor. wa huko si ha yohooni.

to put the hand as a visor to look into the distance. yohooni.

when you open us (to harvest our honey), you will really get tired (we are so numerous). yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope.

to open a hollow object to access the interior. pashai.

it is digging, that one who never sees the light of day (the armadillo). ei the wai re tithare a he wai haruu re maore.

to scratch something with a nail. tithekei.

the dwelling of Yotenama had fallen silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

to have fallen silent, to no longer emit any sound. eemoimi.

as the night was getting dark, he approached the woman. the mi ka ha komãtaaruni suwe ke iha a ikuoma.

woman. ikuoma.

brother-in-law, they will be incapable of enduring that. s h ori pe the pe puhi rohothomapou taomi.

they will be incapable of enduring/resisting. rohothomapou.

he had placed the blowgun vertically on a rock and kept it hidden on the Mountain-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. rihu ke a ha tikemakini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma (mit.

to place a long object vertically on top of another, or in continuation of another; to sit on top of; to seat a child on top of a load in a carrying basket to transport them in that way; to tell someone to position themselves in a canoe. tikeamai.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with plant residues, to be contaminated with plant residues (drinking water), to be covered with dry leaves. heshãheshãpiãi.

lizard (unidentified). sharaima akatho.

they had grabbed it without realizing (along with other objects). pe tea hãrorema.

as an arpon arrow had unfortunately struck one of his children (during the confrontation), we threatened each other. ãtãri ãhini pe ihirupi a ha hãroprariheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

to do something inadvertently, clumsily or unfortunately. hãroprarema.

como llovía mucho estaba mojado y aterido. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

aterido. hereri.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long line that extends. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

straight mountain range (without ups and downs). fthe matoto fririhiã.

to stretch out in a line, to hang a hammock, to be taut. fririhio.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonamini poo a ha hokereni, moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

Horonami hung up the banana peels and pierced them. horonamini tate e ki re waiwei, e siki re rukekeitwei (mit.

a mythological figure in Yanomami folklore. horonamini.

they all started to work in the cultivated field. pe komi hikarimou shoaoma.

go get wood so I can burn (the field). koã ke ãsho ta yua, ya ﬁkarimou.

to work in the cultivated field. hikarimou.

it was not long before the turtle's (sick) head suddenly drooped. poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to find oneself suddenly off balance, to be on the verge of sliding into the void. reiprao.

to smooth, to make smooth and wet. frakahamai.

to smell of carrion. sikiri.

¡el soplo quemante de la diadema-avede-presa se despliega sobre nosotros. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

diadema-avede-presa. koimari.

he made pieces of vine jump by cutting them with his nails. pei ke imisikini e thoku hematha yutuataramai kupariyoma.

nails, claws; flight feathers. imisikini.

I am convinced that there is really no rahara monster. rahara ke ki no wãri kuopimi ma re totihii.

not exist, not be (in a certain place). kuopim.

large worm. heresima.

to defend oneself bravely during an attack. no waiprai.

to defend oneself bravely during an attack. waiprai.

they caught the fish. kama peni yuri pe yokeraremahe.

they caught the fish. yokeraremahe.

plant used to make cords. yamaa.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ya ishorayoma.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

the mosquitoes bite (lit. ukushi pe ishou.

to attack, to assault; to kill. ishoma.

to be crooked, bent, twisted. pehu.

to deflate, to press locally. ãhuhuãkei.

I have developed blisters on my hand. ya imiki yotihirariyoma.

to develop multiple blisters. yotihai.

to present marks of various impressions (the ground). kãshikiwe.

to have become ill due to one or more shawara. shawaramou.

What relation do you have with my younger brother, to whom I give shelter. kihi feesheye ya nohi re thaapraiwei iha, weti naha wa e kuu totihia kurawe.

my younger male relative, my younger brother. feesheye.

I was about to fall. ya mori kerayoma.

he was about to go. a mori huma.

the Shamathari were about to succeed in killing me. shamathari pe wãrini yare mori shea totihiremah e.

to be about to, to be on the verge of. wãrioma.

one cannot smoke this cigarette (it is too tight). sikariyo the ukukuproimi.

to be tired, fatigued. puhi wãrihiwe.

to be unable to do (something). prou.

come to pour it here. eyeha the ta ripraayohe.

to pour, to transfer. poriai.

vamos en la misma dirección que los váquiros. ware ke ki mi re kuahare hami pemaki mi kuaai mi hetua.

plaza. kuahare.

return for a moment on one. yapaprao.

to harvest honey (by striking to open the hive). puu tuyei.

to harvest honey by striking. tuyei.

to take several parts. hakaroararei.

sweetened. kretetikei.

to have moved away (perfective durative). ayorarei.

they (two) leaned the palm stem against a tree. hii ke hi ha yei ke amo shãhe hãthãpikema.

to lean against something, to be leaning against something. hãthão.

de nada te valdrá tener un fusil de caza, tu sangre manará a chorros, eso es lo que te ocurrirá. kopeta re a wãri ma kuo tehe, iyeiye re ke ki pata ﬁreﬁremou totihia ha, kahe ke iha.

rifle, shotgun. mokawa.

to receive an object carried in the hand with the arm hanging down. yepipei.

to have begun to rise (the day). uheherayou.

long and cylindrical basketry piece used to squeeze grated cassava. sebucán.

he is a son: my younger brother has engendered him. hei ihiruye ke a, hei aiyeni ke a tararema.

my younger brother (or younger male cousin of the same sex). osheye.

there is a lot of honey. puu pe no nihi.

to produce a lot of food. no nihi.

I think I will desist. kamiye ke ya no huheprariyopi.

I will desist; I will give up. huheprariyopi.

to have the ear. yimikaki komããi.

to make someone scream in terror. eaimomarei.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been secured (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie firmly with many turns, to secure all the vines at the end of a hammock in this way. hatetepe.

to extinguish a fire. rãikiãi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). tayaraka.

I'm going to paint sinuous lines on the polished part of the lanceolate point. rahaka ya mi eyekeprai.

to paint a broken or sinuous line on several objects. yekeakei.

I have a foreign object lodged in my eye. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to have a foreign object lodged between the eye and eyelid. ripuripupi.

Remove the strings from their bows. hãto ke nahi pe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

to remove the string from a bow (perfective, plural object). hayurarei.

term used to address a female younger than the speaker. shetemi.

to be in the center. mi thariai.

to be in the center, to be in the middle. thario.

to kill someone; to attack, to assault someone. weherariyo.

to go around something to avoid it. ãyotou.

ithãwe, disp. ithãwe, disp. , pl. , pl. obj. obj. V. V. ni ithã, pesi ithã: they descended. ni ithã, pesi ithã.

descended. descendieron.

I have lost (thrown away) mine. ipa ya hoyarema.

let's go there to knock down my pijiguaos with a stick. ipa rasha peheki ta rekeatu.

where is my bamboo tip of the shiiwe species. weti ipa rafaka shiiwe ke a.

my. -ye.

in the place where her (bleeding) fragments were scattered on the ground, the guacamayas wallowed (to paint themselves). a hihiwe yapikope ha arari pe tihirumoma (mit.

to crawl on the ground, wallow (in mud, blood, etc.). tihurumou.

to have stopped at the entrance of a dwelling. eweheprawe.

(lit. mroosiri (lit. the people of the flies). el pueblo de las moscas).

flies. mroosiri.

when I (get old) and start walking badly (lit. pitha ya pe wãri kapai wãritiai tehe ya yahitheriprope tao ya puhi ha kuni.

I will stay at home. yahitheriprope.

I don. pramari.

abraza firmemente el tronco del árbol y corta el bejuco. wa hãyokoã ha rohothoikuni, thoo thotho ta peprari.

to squeeze, to hug, to embrace. hãyokoãi.

I am the one who deflowered her. kamiyeni ya ka hiweherema.

to deflower, to devirgin. hiweherei.

they send their hekura against Titiri. titiri a hapeihe.

to send one. fape.

it is there where they intend to go for a long hunting trip. kiha pe pe niya heniyomou kuprei.

to go for a long hunting trip. heniyomou.

Murciélago fue a agarrarse de un algarrobo muy alto. ãro kohi yashokootayope ha heweriwe ke a wãri re sutiketayonowei.

to be elevated on something high. yashokootayope.

Venado se ceolada fabricada con la madera de dicho bamraspó totalmente la piel de los brazos. lanke poko siki hoã haikirariyoma.

Venado. lanke.

the day is going to rise (the speaker is in the house). the mi uhehepei.

to begin to rise (the speaker is in the house). uhehepei.

he killed two paujíes one after the other. paru-horokotori a horohoprarema.

he killed two animals or two enemies during the same expedition. horohoprarema.

1. to sway violently, to slide abruptly (long object); to stumble. 2. to let oneself fall backwards into the water. wekeprakei.

I throw the bee's excrement (the speaker is in a tree). pei ya shi hoyai kupe.

what are you doing there (at the water's edge). weti ke wa the rii thai kupe.

a multitude of fish. prarou kupe.

(auxiliary verb indicating epistemic modality). kupe.

night fell completely while we were eating. yamaki iyai tehe, yamaki ka he komãrãyou.

we stood for a long time and night fell. yamaki upratao tehe, the mi ka komãi.

to be surprised, to be obstructed, to become numerous, to get dark. komãi.

to have (like the horãma birds) a snort that precedes one's physical presence in a place. fheã no horãmapi.

to have (like the horãma birds) a snort or sound that precedes one. horãmapi.

the people of the capuchins climbed in great number a bejuco de cadena, the people of the white monkeys did the same. rasirasi thotho hami wishari pe pruka tuketayoma, hoashiri pe sho pe pruka isia pariketayoma (mit.

some climbed quickly to the roof posts. ai rope pe tuoproma, totahima pe hami.

hold on tightly while you climb. wa tuo tehe a ta rohothoiku.

to climb, to scale. toreke.

omawe koheki roared when night fell. omawe koheki pata re rario re weyarakiri (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

mythical being; it has a feline head, huge arms and is arboreal. It attacks men to devour them.. koheriwe.

to hang near the ground, to tie low (incomplete aspect). yahatotoai.

to hang near the ground, to tie low. yahatotou.

to be sloping downwards; to have one end higher than the other (hammock). werehea.

mythological ancestor who participated in the theft of fire from Baba. kanaporomi.

to give birth to a child. kuprou.

look, when the sun is at that point, I will come back here again. mamo ta shatiiku, eyeha the kutou tehe ya hayua kopariyo.

to repeat, to reproduce an event or action. shatiiku.

tuvo que pasar mucho tiempo antes de que el suelo recuperara la firmeza, entonces ellos descendieron nuevamente. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma.

to become firm, to recover strength. hiyakou.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuãprou.

nuevamente, empuñó sus flechas. shereka ke ki hurihia re koreiwei.

empuñó. hurihirei.

when I was close I sat down. ya ahetetou tehe ya rokema.

to be close. ahete.

Jaguar went around to take another path. ai ke yo hami ira a ãyoã re mahikeiwei (mit.

I have opened the path there (thus going around the obstacle). iha pei ya mayo pahetia ãyoã shoareherima.

to go around, to bypass. ãyo.

lightning season. fihirãma sh tehe.

lightning, sunlight. fihirãma.

I express my impotence. the pe wetiprou ha mrakuni.

my impotence. mrakuni.

to do a somersault. mohe hotekeprou.

to do a somersault. hotekeprou.

as those who were walking in front changed direction again, we slid down crouched towards them. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma: ãkroto nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados.

we slid down crouched towards them. ãkroto.

to shake a bamboo arrowhead laterally to remove it from the arrow shaft; to kill a man. hãwetãi.

he returns (to live) with us. a peaai koãyorua.

he returns (to live) with us. koãyorua.

like an arrow it had unfortunately hit one of his children (during the confrontation). riheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

like an arrow. riheni.

to become more. koeheãi.

it results hard when touched with the foot. the kapamou hihuwe.

results hard when touched with the foot. kapamou.

two guayucos have been put one next to the other. porakapi wayuko ke kipi herurua.

to pile up, to stack. heruyutu.

we realized that the chigüires ate the banana plants. kuratha sipe ha kãyuri pe iyai no thar e s h i.

to eat. kãyuri.

he was lying on the ground under the roof. shikã ha a praoma.

I remained in ambush for a long time at the edge of the garden plot. hikari theka kasi hami ya pratioma.

to remain lying on the ground for a long time; to remain in ambush for a long time. pratao.

to put above, to raise up. yutehai.

to become short. homotoai.

brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do, we will reject each other. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to reject someone, to repel, to kill (in certain contexts). hãihãyou.

don't you see that I'm silent because of the gossip that one keeps hearing. wã the kahiki eemou tapraimi ha totihii, wãno ke pe hiriãprai ha.

to perceive a distant noise. hiriãprai.

the trail of the tapirs is very fresh, and their strong smell is felt. ware ke the pe mãyo pata ãhi, ware ke the pe ni pata hirakawe.

to naturally and habitually emanate a strong smell. ni hirakawe.

(related to) to be juxtaposed. hahatho.

at the top of the hill, there where the path ends, they made me rest again. the mi re totopiyei ha, yo he haope ha, yare kãi wãshimi horuu re kopeiwehei.

to reach the ridge/crest (perfective). totorayou.

to wrinkle, crease or crumple locally. rukuru.

to become soft or deflated (as a consequence of a process or an act); to be partially soft, to be locally soft. ãsiã.

1. blister, swelling filled with pus or serous liquid; to be soft, flexible. 2. to make whirlpools (water). uhururupi.

(he) tied together the legs of the tapir (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie together the front and hind legs of an animal to carry it on one. warea.

to provoke fatigue, to fatigue. motamarei.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihiprou.

to cut a portion of a fruit, remove a piece or slice by cutting from the stem to the opposite end (as a melon is cut); to cut an object that is more or less round in this way. hakaro.

skeleton. iki.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was shaking where the others were passing through. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

to move or shake foliage while passing through. hushuhushu.

flashlight. pira.

since you have wives, lie down in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yãhãhe.

the plants of cañas para flecha (arrow canes) sprouted scattered and the tucanes fell in love with them. shereka shororowe e siki ha kuruni mayepi peni shereka ki nohi toamahe.

it is planted spaced apart. the tia no shororowe.

dispersed, scattered. shororowe.

to cover. pahu.

she will sit here again. a roa koãhãperei.

she will sit here again. koãhãperei.

to give a large amount. hothethekei.

in the places where the caterpillars were pressed together (on the tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook her packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a werereope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma (mit.

I arrived at a place where the kasha caterpillars were grouped (in parallel, one with the other). kasha ke a werereope hami ya warokema.

to be arranged in parallel, a strip of sand arranged parallel to the shore. wererea.

I go. yo* mi hinowe.

to go. yo*.

I want to eat meat. ya re naikare. I will go fishing and drink the fish broth. yuri ke ki re titire ya ki ha rekani, ya ki pouku ta koapra.

I want to eat meat!. naikare!.

trace, mark from the previous day. fweyawe.

you can see that I have broken my arrow, I have repaired it by tying a fragment to the extension of the shaft. shereka ya ha keprarini ya he tikeparema ma re kui.

to repair a broken arrow by tying two pieces of cane end to end. tikeparema.

supernatural beings of the yai the class, they can cause diseases and take possession of a person. hekrãhekrãri.

the tobacco is getting moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to be completely moldy. rohore.

dust (plural). hekrãhekrã ke ki.

dust. ekrã.

to be twisted in one way or another, to retain a lasting mark after having been bent (an arrow). ethethewe.

to growl like a váquiro. waremou.

not fully dried (firewood). wahawe (leña).

half-cooked, not fully cooked/dried. wahawe.

back. lomo.

ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati.

to perfume, to give a pleasant smell to something. kreteriãmai.

to offer a portion of meat. wahakewemi.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to bend, curve, fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. thorukou.

I'm going to sit on one buttock. ya roa kayarekei.

to sit on one buttock. kayarekei.

to receive a part. shetekepei.

not able to understand what he says. a wã hiriproimi.

not able to understand what he says. hiriproimi.

let's go several (people). pe ta pakihipraruheri.

go several (people). pakihipraruheri.

in all places the smallpox decimated the Yanomami (lit. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

to decimate, to make disappear. piyekeo.

to shorten. onohoãi.

a skilled honey gatherer. hutosi.

downstream, to be placed downstream. koroa.

to open. hape.

to gather or hold the arms over the chest. yokokokei.

el frío me impide mantenerme sobre mis piernas. ya wahati no wãri uprawema.

impede. uprawema.

you gave (to each one) two objects from the White people, they are young men. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru momo oshe pe ma kui riha.

to obtain, get, or receive two objects at a time. yãhutaai.

when they were near the place of deskipi (residence) they slept. mino; cuando estuvieron cerca del lugar de deskipi mioma.

residence, dwelling place. deskipi.

palm; Astrocaryum sp. (Arecaceae). pafa.

to have a beard. kaweiki weuhuwe.

to have hair growing on the chin. kaweii.

they got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

to get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people), to come off and fall one after another (fruits). weyoyorayou.

syn. sin.

he will go to the forest. hei ai yoka re horere.

forest. yoka.

(he/she) speaks upriver and also it can be The word 'yare' in Yanomami means 'caí'. yare hifeti.

he hit me on the head and also it can be The word 'yare' in Yanomami means 'to feel the effects'. yare he shepema.

upriver. yare.

to imitate the double of a person who has become ill due to the loss of their noreshi, to seek the lost double of a person. noreshimou.

in the place where the body of my deceased female relative is laid out, an unknown and terrifying voice was heard. ipa wãware na ware na: ﬂor gamopétala del árbol ware nahi, es remashi a re rukepiyei ha, yai the kipi ã no re kimuy perfumada y a las mujeres les gusta llevarripiyei e.

the place where the body of a deceased female relative is laid out. rukepiyei.

the others come out of the water quickly. yetu ai the pe hashir i o k e i.

they come out of the water, they set foot on land (from a canoe). hashiriokei.

the two went out. ke kipi hara yoma.

to surpass in width. rayoko.

the child starts to take the breast. aka hesi keo: el niño se pone a tomar la teta.

to enroll, to coil. i1.

to resist with courage. wãroyou.

he quickly painted some ugly circles on his body. wãritiwe a oni pata roherohemoma.

to paint circles on the body, to be decorated with circles. rohaha.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially carved the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to carve or engrave circularly, but not encompassing the entire circumference, on a cylindrical or spherical object. eshehekei.

carpintero real pico amarillo; Campephilus melanoleucos (Picidae). ereZool.

bent, inclined, folded under the effect of a load. teiprawe.

it claws him and immediately gets him. a imisiki warihimou shoao tehe, yuprou ma tharei.

to grab with claws or nails. warihimou.

to be unbalanced and about to fall. porutou.

that one who falsely addresses me as a male elder relative, I do not like that at all (because he has not fulfilled his duties as a younger brother to me). hei ware nohi hore re ãimaiwei, ya no wã totihai ma re mai.

to be called a male elder relative by someone else. ãimaiwei.

to perform or cause to perform an activity that affects multiple objects. marari.

1. to move away, go far away (intransitive verb), 2. to prune, cut branches (transitive verb). payo.

He is angry. rerokotorawe akasi.

to be angry. akasi.

to do it in order to give it away. wahathokei.

Iewe brought cassava bread (to offer upon arrival). ieweni nashi hiki re perakeherayouwei.

to bring/carry (something) from a distant place to the place of the speaker. perakeherayouwei.

extend the arm. poko ta kasheshetaru.

extend the arm. kasheshet.

desgranar maíz. fyono hushishai.

crumbled, cracked. hushisha.

to have the ear. yimikaki komããi.

tamandua (anteater). shokro.

flower, fruit. weti pei ke wa the ki.

to practice an incision on. hikore.

he hid his blowgun, which he left placed (on a rock) on the Mountain of the woman who is menstruating. makini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma (mit.

Mountain of the woman who is menstruating. Monte-de-la-mujerque-tiene-su-regla.

stop complaining about not receiving a share. nakimou mai wa wãri ha kuoni.

to complain about not receiving a share in a food distribution, or to complain about not receiving the share one expected to receive. nakimou.

to perforate, to make a hole, to open a package. horoshokei.

spacious, uncluttered (in the forest). hikokoã.

to take objects out of a canoe or water one after the other. washiripraai.

it was necessary to make many efforts to finally approach him. yãkumi a nape prakea ha yãshiriheni.

to do/achieve something despite difficulties. yãshiriheni.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to redden slightly, to become reddish. teãyã.

we moved away quickly and silently. rope yamaki kareherima.

to move away quickly and silently. kareherima.

to carry an entire prey in the mouth (animal). wahahupou.

the hekura made me lose my power. hekura peni yare puhi yashurema.

to lose one. yashurei.

to wrap around something, to enroll around something. yãthoriprou.

(he/she/it) speaks upstream. peipei shiﬁ.

upstream (river). peipei.

he is the one who wants to kill you and with that intention he got a bamboo tip. ihini re wa riyã matamai ha totihioni wa pehi tea totihirei kurei.

to kill someone. mratamai.

to have a cough. othomipi.

the man went in company of the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). thapore tao, wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

to mix, to intermingle different objects. thapore.

they approached to see. the mii mi re ikukeiwei.

to approach quickly with a purpose. ikukeiwei.

to blow. huumi.

in this point the water is not deep (in the south of the Orinoco). iha the pe henasio totihio tharei.

to be thin, shallow, or not thick. henasio.

to heal; to stop. yokekeai.

it is hot. shiki katohi.

to be hot. katohi.

to pinch someone with the nails (once). tirii.

para. bú.

we went hunting for a prolonged period farther away (than usual). he piye hami yamaki heniyomoma.

we went hunting for a prolonged period farther away (than usual). heniyomoma.

perfective of the inchoative (to become blunt gradually by successive impacts). pohotorayou.

pei. huumotho.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pe re koyokaiwei, ya pe nowã thaa shoarei kurei.

people of another community. koyokomou.

the atavío of a demonio advanced more towards the patas of the monstruo (the man found himself in the interior of the bestia). puhiopehe.

to hang near the ground, to tie low. yahatototou.

I am worried, there are not enough cooked plantains and there are only two small bunches left in the field. ya puhi ma re horihitou totihirohe, roshi the no wãi kuprou totihiopi mai, porakapi the kipi wai onohowe yaua kupiyekiri.

to worry, to be anxious. horihitou.

to reflect, to question oneself, to wonder what one is going to do, to be undecided. wetinahamou.

we will prepare bamboo arrowheads like these (to go to war). e naha rafaka ke pe kuwe pema pe ha kopemani.

to prepare bamboo arrowheads. kopemani.

to become flexible; to offer less and less resistance to penetration; to become soft locally. ereremo.

they are making arrows. porepore ke pe re hirapiyei hami yãnora.

arrow. yãnora.

I did not sleep all night. ya mamo he wakararayoma.

to not close one's eyes all night. mamo he wakarai.

to remain in a certain place or situation until dawn; to stay awake all night. wakarai.

I have given it to him/her. kama ke iha ya the hipekema.

to be deep, to be hollow, to be empty (of a cavity or container). koehe.

Hija mía, apresúrate a ir a darle de comer a tu esposo (ubicado enfrente). oãsimi heãrohe nii e ki wai hipea ta haikuhuru.

hijo mío, arma tu arco (tú eres quien va a disparar). oãsi, kaheni re the ta iyoku.

my younger sister, my daughter, etc. (female). oãsimi.

he is lazy. a mohi.

I'm starting to get tired (the speaker is in a tree). ya mohiãi ke a re kupiyeheri.

lazy, tired of, reluctant. mohi.

spirit associated with the coati, very brave. yarusheriwe.

(related word). krii.

it is not big enough (what is said to excuse oneself when offering someone a small portion of meat). the etehemi.

to produce a weak or moderate sound. fwã hai etehemi.

to be small, not to be very big. etehemi.

Drink water. kushu ha.

to drink. ushu.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are clustered together there, lick the juice that comes out of them. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

that are clustered together. yorukurati.

to cry for a dead person. premapou.

We arrived at the shapono. shapono ha, prohu.

to arrive at a dwelling, to reach a destination. peripraiwei.

to break into pieces, to crumble. nahihiprou.

to divide into two parts, to split in two. pashihiprai.

the termites will start hollowing out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororoprarei.

to start hollowing out. hororoprai.

hunt animals (= go hunting). yaro pe ta niyahe.

to hunt animals, to go hunting. niyahe.

they cut the roof poles of the house. hãto re nahi re peyeiwehei.

they cut the roof poles. peyeiwehei.

to harden, to become abnormally compact (the pulp of a fruit). amatopiai.

father-in-law, hurry up, when the sun is still low, the bees become visible. e naha the kuo tehe pei re naki wawetoai: suegro, apúrate, cuando el sol todavía está bajo, las abejas se hacen visibles.

father-in-law, stepfather. hoape.

to clean oneself. wamoreãi.

who has tilted the container for my seeds kashuhuri. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

a container for seeds. kashuhuriye.

to fill. maniki.

I stopped taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

I stopped doing something; I gave up doing what I used to do. tiraarema.

they threw the feather case, they transformed it into a pava rajadora, and then dawn came in the house. karaha si ha sheyerini, si ha mãrãshipramariheni, pe he harua shoapema.

they transformed it into a pava rajadora (a type of bird) and then dawn came. mãrãshipramariheni.

to sit stretching the legs. fmatha shaiprao.

1. To be lying face down. 2. To drag a part of the body on the ground.. shaiprao.

do not cease to visit me. ware he warou mraotihe.

he never comes to visit me. yare he warou tao ma mai.

the dog has been several days without going hunting, make him kill a tapir. shama ke a ta shemahe, hiima ke a prao he weyaprou ma re korohe.

to visit someone; to spend the night somewhere; to remain in a situation for several days. weya.

to have wavy lines traced on one. hukekamou.

rotten (fibrous material). horepi.

vamos, vamos, aprende ese breve discurso. pei, pei, horotowe the ã ta titiparihe.

learn that brief speech. titiparihe.

the termites will hollow out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororoprarei.

to hollow out, to make a hole. hororokei.

he will carry a machete and nothing else. sipara ke a pou yawereoheripe.

to do something alone or in an isolated manner, to carry a single object. yawerea.

he obstructed the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

I cover the opening of the cachicamo's den. opo ya ka he kahuai.

to close, to obstruct an opening. kahuakei.

I, I go to sit down for a moment. kamiye ya roo aheteo.

I am sick. kamiye ya hariri.

I have a cough. kamiye ya thokopi.

I, me (emphatic). kamiyo.

to place something on the edge. kasiakei.

to have reddish reflections (locally). wahehou.

to be covered in dew. femaãhu.

Wild squirrel was perhaps about to run back. wayapashiriwe ke a no rerea mi yaparayopi.

wild squirrel. wayapashiriwe.

it gets dark. mi rumãhããi.

to darken, to get dark. rumãhããi.

the vine forms a hook along its entire length. thoo thotho ishakowe.

to form a hook with the entire length of something. ishakowe.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

to cause something to be in a central location, near the fire, water, above or below. mape.

to quickly make a bowstring by rolling the fiber on the thigh with the palm of the hand. hitihitiprai.

(if you continue like this) lamentably I will be forced to hit you (on the way). pe wãri shea tikoreferiiwe.

lamentably, unfortunately. tikoreferiiwe.

The revenge is complete, they have avenged the dead (lit. enaha re ãhi rii kuwe, ãhi rii akatahuprai waikirayou kuhahei.

to break a harpoon arrowhead in two (to avenge a war death). ãtãri ãhi akatahuprai.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent under the weight of the tapir climbing on it. kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei.

to bend under weight. hithotheprou.

immediately, the otter started swimming under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the water surface, behind the clouds (celestial body). urur.

to blow a substance through a tube made from the cucurito fruit bone in order to make someone inhale hallucinogens. fkareshi mo horai.

to blow a substance through a tube made from the cucurito fruit bone in order to make someone inhale hallucinogens. fkareshi.

uku. yarupeto.

I will go look for powerful hekuras in their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make (something) pivot or rotate less than a half turn. hãmorikei.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

to have the eyes turned or blank, to look with anger, to look at someone askance. poruh.

plants that. hishihishi.

it is certain that I was not sitting (a while ago). ya ma re roo maohe.

progressive/durative aspect marker. mao.

Bot. mamo kasi onionirimi.

tree (unidentified plant). onionirimi.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

to gather, to assemble, to group together. kokãã.

go away, get going, I started to have chills (= I'm sick). pei ye, kuhamihe she, ya si re sãihipraruhe.

to have chills, to suffer regularly from feverish chills. sãihiwe.

they were laments of women (crying for a dead person) and also it can be The word 'suwe' in Yanomami means 'woman'. suwe re pe miã kuoma.

he will not be the husband of the two women for long and also it can be The word 'suwe' in Yanomami means 'again'. suwe ke kipi pou no teteheprou mai ke the.

woman. suwe.

they performed the dance of presentation and night fell. the pe ha praiarini, the mi titirayom a.

the dance of presentation. praiarini.

when the great fire was blazing vigorously, Siroromi appeared. wake pata waowaomou tehe siroromi a petariyoma.

to flame, to blaze producing flames. wakei.

contents of the intestines. shihipe.

antonym of okãprawe. kushe.

What is said to lie on the ground, by the water downstream. weti ke the hoã praa kupokiri.

downstream, downriver. pokiri.

to walk in a long line (in silence). atraprithothoprou.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain-spirit shakes the ends of the house poles. ei maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe.

keep your bow armed. nahi ta iyopou.

my son-in-law. fipa nahi.

certain objects derived from trees (the bow, posts and poles used to build the house, the house itself or a camp in the forest). naﬁki.

when one possesses arrows, like us, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

to kill someone or be able to do so (lit.: possess their breath); to put someone or something in a certain situation, offer someone the possibility of possessing something. thamapou.

he picked up the dead dog and lay in ambush waiting for the jaguar. hiima a nomawe ha hokereni, ira a nohi repoma.

to ambush, to lie in wait. repoma.

I throw salt into the cooking water. sayu ya keamai.

to throw, to drop into water. keamai.

he entered whistling. husi koikoimorayou.

to enter whistling into a dwelling (a visitor). husi koikoimo.

to damage/deteriorate rapidly. wãrititou.

Nosiriwe cried (for lack of tobacco). nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

In the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

Ancestor who spread tobacco. osiriwe.

I saw in a dream the emerald toucanets throwing magical plants (heri) out of their beaks. aroaromi koshi pe ãhã re kure ihi the pe pehi mahari yutuhoma.

emerald toucanet (bird species). aroaromi.

to tie something tightly by wrapping it several times with a vine. ikreherarei.

to line up in the center of the dwelling. shaninipei.

be attentive while you walk. a ta moyaweaheri.

please, here we have to start being prudent. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to be prudent, vigilant, attentive; to be on guard. moyawei.

(habla de río arriba. pruku maﬁ.

(habla del sur del Orinoco. prukumari.

(habla del sur del Orinoco. prukunama nasiki.

upriver. pruku.

plants. nathosiki.

they returned on their steps, they gave up (their visit). acagua.

to come to have pain in the foot. yutukuprou.

the Yanomami inhaled the hallucinogens. yãnomãmi peni epena a koamahe: los Yãnomãmi inhalaron los alucinógenos.

inhale. inhalar.

the women went to break thin sticks by hand for the roofs of the temporary shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of a temporary shelter. fhurohuroma.

red brocket deer; Mazama americana (Cervidae). krokohorimi.

to save a child by breastfeeding it. mi thapo.

to save someone. thapo.

to wait for a fruit to become shopo, to allow a fruit to reach that state before consuming it. shopomai.

we walk in a line. katiwe yamaki huu.

to be in a line. katiwe.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something outside before entering a dwelling. henapema.

bring the meat here, transporting it on the back. yaro a ta yehipoima.

bring the meat here, transporting it on the back. yehipoima.

to reflect, to question oneself, to wonder what one is going to do, to be undecided. haimorayou.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

the older ones grabbed axes. prowehewe peni hãyokoma pe teararemahe.

to grow, to get fat, to be of medium or rather large size, a mature man (not yet an elder). prowehe.

he woke up at daybreak. the haruu uheheprou tehe a rãrãyoma.

he woke up. rãrãyoma.

rodents like rats and mice smell bad/begin to rot. thopode roedores como las ratas y los ratones.

to smell bad, to begin to rot (meat). thopode.

the tapirs are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were many rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be stopped/at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothothoã.

to be very angry. romoromo.

food whose juice or pulp can be consumed by biting and aspirating. watetamou.

they spend time making love. a shiro wamotii.

we had been stopped for a good while when the noise was heard. yamaki uprahatio tehe yetu the ã petariyo kurei.

expresses the duration or repetition of the same action for a certain time. wamotii.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. eyeha ke ware wãri yeﬁi, pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

las mariposas estuvieron a punto de pegarles en el hocico. hurari peni pe hushi mori tuyea tikoaparemahe.

nape, nuca, hocico. tuyea.

to hesitate, not know what to do. puﬁ weti hamimou.

to hesitate, not know what to do. puﬁ weti hamimo.

He/she speaks the upstream dialect. Ofra theri.

upstream (speech). ofra.

immediately the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the surface of the water. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma.

to float habitually (plural objects). pokekewe.

other children gathered with the first ones. ai ihiru pe warokema.

I arrived when he was gravely ill. a hariri prao totihio tehe ya warokema.

we arrived at the site where they usually come for long hunting trips. pe wãri re heniyomopraaiwei ha yamaki warokema.

to arrive at a place, to reach, to gather with. warokema.

seducir a una mujer beneficiándose con la complicidad de un compadre. puhi washuu.

to seduce a woman by taking advantage of a friend. washuu.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to make war on each other. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to be always at war. iyãtããi.

to paint a motif composed of two crossed lines on someone. yãhirikei.

the girl that they kidnapped when they attacked us, they certainly carry her on their backs. suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

they carry her on their backs. yehiponowehei.

the cowboys were approaching us. ware ke ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

I did not see (the enemy warriors) carrying the little girl (who they had just kidnapped). suweheri ya wãri yehia taprai ma re maoperei.

epistemic modality suffix indicating uncertainty. perei.

to start pulverizing, reducing to ashes; to start distributing (game, fish). kopeheprai.

(speech from upriver). ãshowã.

he walked around showing off in front of the women. weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, ya ki kãi huyamou ta yaio.

to show off, to flaunt. huyamou.

the arrow got stuck in a branch and they asked him to go get it. shereka a ha shatiikuni a nosiyemamahe: "a ta thaprari", e pe kuma.

to ask a favor (for someone else). shatiikuni.

they live in two dwellings situated next to each other. peria poakawe.

to separate to live in two distinct but nearby groups, to divide into two branches to form an island (of a watercourse). poakaa.

immerse yourselves in the river immediately. pe ta ithoa shoaparu.

to immerse oneself in water. ithooprou.

source. fihete u ka.

it clung to the treetop, which bent under its weight, and stretched out its neck to see. hii ke the hi wai ihete noshi hariraai ha a oraki kayahaapraroma.

source, tip, extremity. fihete.

in the place where there is a very small conuco, an enormous bunch hangs from a palm that has a twisted base. hei the re patirahari hami, si koro re toyekere ha si hami, ei ke ki pata.

to burn in several separate places in the conuco (swidden farm). patirahari.

here it is (without a doubt). hei a ma re kui.

the váquiros were approaching us. ware ke ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

epistemic modality. -i-.

to mix powders by stirring with the fingertips. tikuruprai.

Bot., plant vine cultivated; Lageneria sp.. hishima.

we moved around during the night. titi ha re pemaki huatarou haruu.

to go from one place to another, to move around. huatarou.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear, to split. kre.

to become foggy. hukosiãi.

to tie the legs of a hunted animal to the body (to carry it). wikokoãi.

it was at this time that I began to make love (regularly). re tehe ya sirisirimou kutariyoma.

to make love (said by a man). niaasi*.

to send someone to navigate in a canoe; factitive of kareprou and karepraai. karepraamai.

pei. koshiki.

the one who rubs himself with paint = the one who rolls in the mud. i ki re hirikope o hei ki re hirikore.

the one who rubs himself with paint. hirikope.

to have a sore finger, to have an injured finger. fimiki no ushuwe.

to have a sore finger, to have an injured finger. no ushuwe.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

how beautiful is the sound that comes out of the orifice. thora re wa the kahiki hoã wãi ta wãnipraparure ke.

the sound that comes out of the orifice. wãnipraparure.

in or towards the lower part of the roof; behind the dwelling. shikã ha(mi).

in or towards the lower part of the roof; behind the dwelling. ha(mi).

(Deer) shaved (all the meat) from its arm. hayariwe poko siki hoã haikirariyoma.

they piled up the leaves and then swept the floor. yãã pe henape ha yototoamapotuheni, pitha a hoãremahe.

to shave pubic hair. hoãrei.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

1. to bend, to bend under weight; 2. fissure, crack; 3. to be elevated above. yasho.

give me one too. ipa ai ta shererepa.

to divide in two, to separate into two parts. shererepa.

this is my son-in-law. fekamaye ke a (habla de río arriba.

my son-in-law. hekamaye.

to tear, to rip. feti.

we slid towards them crouched down. ãkroto nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados.

to coil up, curl up. ãkrotoãi.

the plant of the birds of prey occupies a wide surface. koikoimi henaki pata re upraa re yaweterakiri ye.

to be spacious inside (a cavity, the interior of an object), to occupy an extensive surface. yawetewe.

and then we sat down. yamaki he ha yariyaritaikini.

we sat down. yariyaritaikini.

softened, crushed. hushikã.

in this place I used to eat hoshohã grains. heha hoshohã ya moku wai kuperei.

a short or small edible fruit of a palm tree. hoshohã.

to have white spots on the body (caused by a fungus). yoapiprou.

the Shãshãpiwei mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

to be painted or striped with vertical lines. sherorowe.

a woman is lying next to me in the hammock. suwe ke ya yakapou.

to keep close to oneself in a hammock; to carry a small child in one. yakapou.

Brother-in-law, don't make me unhappy, break off a little of your yopo cake for me. shoriwe, yare no preaamatihe, the wai tiiprai mi hetua ta shoaroni.

1. To break off, detach with the fingers a portion of something, take a little of the hallucinogenic yopo by breaking it off [tiikei, perf.: to do this to give; tiipei, perf.: to receive something that has been detached in this way; tiiprai: to start doing this; tiirei, perf.: to do this to take for oneself]. 2. To nibble at the hook (a fish).. tiikei.

to immobilize a person by holding their arms against their body (to prevent them from committing an act of violence). yokokorei.

we are dispersed and that's how we advance. pemaki rãkokowe ke pemaki kurayoheri.

"they already hate us", we say as we pass by. "pemareki nohi wãripou waikiwehe", yamaki kurayoheriiwei.

to advance, to move forward. kurayoheri.

to walk for a long time at the head. oratao.

no te metas el anzuelo en la boca, porque corres el riesgo de tragártelo. uhea a hopotihe, wa suharei.

mouth. hopotihe.

we fished upstream from where the Karesisiwe river flows into (the main river). karesisiwe u re papohori ha pemaki yuri kããma.

to flow into, to discharge into (a river). papohori.

to make a deep cut in a tree. mi shoekeãi.

we collected yaguas (by plucking them) and ate them. yei yamaki a ukani, yamaki wama.

we collected/gathered (by pulling/plucking). ukani.

to pass ahead. hayu-ai.

I did not hide my aversion, I was elsewhere and turned my back on them. ya pe nohi wãripou hitheonomi, shomi hami ya e pe yaipe reoma.

to turn one. reoma.

whistle by rounding the lips to call someone. husho wã hai.

to whistle. husho.

to paint a motif composed of two crossed lines on someone. yãhirikei.

he hung the ripe plantains. kuratha ke ki wake re yaumakeiwei.

to hang several objects. yauamakei.

We arrived at the shapono. shapono ha, prohu.

arrive at a dwelling, arrive at destination. prohu!.

he painted his face negligently. the mi hore wãri yãtãkema.

to paint oneself negligently or hastily. yãtãkema.

object in fabrication, object. yãnoestado.

they went away when it dawned. tehe mi ukekou pe hurayoma.

to go away. ukekai.

to pull down the lower eyelid. mamo kasiki yorere.

to pull down. yorere.

to think suddenly. hãhi.

piasaba palm. raea.

he/she died. a nohi mohoturayoma.

he/she died. mohoturayoma.

to close the eye halfway. shukukuai.

the curiara (canoe) is handled/managed well. kanawa ke a koromamou totihitawe.

to handle/manage well. koromamou.

to stick, affix (multiple objects). sutimai.

sister, come closer. amiye, wa ha aheteikiyoni.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

to approach, to get close. ahetekei.

to shake or sway something planted in the ground, to test if it is firmly rooted. hãwete.

he has stopped breathing (he is dead). a herekou mrat a r i y o m a.

breathe. herekou.

while Jaguar climbed higher up the tree, his arms could less and less embrace the trunk (which became thicker and thicker). irariwe ke pokoku suriroherima.

to climb a tree trunk that cannot be fully embraced by the arms, using a vine wrapped around the ankles. suriripeherii.

to become rough, granular, rugose. ererou.

to try repeatedly, to keep trying. wapetaai.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been fixed (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie firmly in many turns, to secure solidly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. tetai.

to be surrounded, to be surpassed on both sides. yakaro.

fish, copella. rapasimi.

to come out of the ground (corn sprout). maturipiai.

1. Corn sprout that comes out of the ground. 2. Hisiomi grain too young to be harvested.. maturipi.

I get goods. matohi ya pe toai.

I go to get shawarakurimi fruits. shawarakurimi ya ki toai.

to get, to obtain, to take. toani.

the fish did not delay in jumping out of the water. yetu yuri ke ki homoma.

I have fished fish and also it can be The word 'yuri' in Yanomami means 'fish'. yuri ya ki yokerarema.

you two eat the fish. yuri pe ta wapiri.

to jump out. yuri.

give that to the one who is lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

to remain for a long time lying in the shikã (lower part of the roof) of a dwelling. shikãtao.

I will go there to live apart and open a conuco. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e thoothoomokiriowe.

I will go there to live apart and open a conuco (clearing for cultivation). thoothoomokiriowe.

barely perceptible discontinuous movement that manifests on the surface, such as the slight trembling of debris on the water surface or the wriggling of larvae on the surface. hipihipipraro.

walk behind me. pei ya nohã ha a ta kutho she.

to follow, to walk behind. kutho.

to divide, to distribute into several parts. shekeremai.

attack suddenly. keprakei.

to bend, to twist (inchoative). koheãi.

1. To bend, to twist. kohe.

fat, big (living being). hutehea.

to decide at the last moment to join a group that is leaving. ayata-.

two tails. horohopi shinakipi.

two tails. shinakipi.

the noise of the eyelids of the ceremonial dialogue. poshe mamokasi heã.

ceremonial dialogue. poshe.

to become enemies, to start having hostile relations. napeprou.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. iroroai.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after another all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects, at different times; can also connote a frequentative. -pr-.

to untie the foreskin from the cord it is tied to. wahoprou.

to descend vertically. wahohai.

twins. mamisiki.

Sorocuá advanced staggering, and then collapsed. kurekurethawe re e krei re kuaaheriiwei, a shea shoaparema.

to sway, rock, totter, lean forward and backward; to stagger, tilt, slant downward abruptly (often in a threatening manner). kuaaheriiw.

to flap wings without flying (a bird). yathetheai.

move away, my little one. oãsi, a ta payekeiku.

move away, separate, put at a suitable distance. payekeiku.

they blocked the entrance to the den (to prevent the animal from escaping). hiki ithãmahe, pei ke pekapi kasi hami.

the cave of a rahara monster is near you. mihi rahara re ke ki pekapi praa re kure (mit.

den, lair, cave. ithãmahe.

come to place yourself in the center. eyemi ke pari a ta mi ãmoparu.

to place in the center. waropariyoma.

water that trembles. rayukuai.

(synonym of ihirupi). horoto.

to cut, to break off. pahetiai.

we called each other, we called to gather. yamaki pokomayoma, yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to shout to call or attract someone; to call the hekura (newly initiated shaman). pokomi.

when he reached the last part of his ascent, they (the two of them) made the tree dilate. pe poushokutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

1. In a process of approaching, poushokutou is located between the incoative and the terminative. 2. To place oneself for a while in the center of a moving line, or in the middle (the central part) of a curiara.. poushokutou.

Õmawe and Yoawe discovered the dangerous bamboo tips. omawe ke kipini rahaka ãiãmo ke ki taprai re kupariyouwei (mit.

dangerous bamboo tips. kupariyouwei.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to have persistent stomach pains, to suffer from stomach pains regularly. ninimorayou.

to sway, to knock against each other (especially when carrying objects on the back). mãiãaimou.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. hãihãiyomi natha hi.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. hãihãiyomi.

plumage (of a chick). yahoprou.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another people for a short time or just for a moment. pashikiprou.

brother-in-law, I'm leaving. shori, ya kuhamii.

to set out, to depart. kuhamiãi.

tree species. megalophylla.

come to fight me. yare (ware) ta hupayo.

to fight, to combat. hupayo.

even the coati skins, they (the hekura) carry them bleeding around their necks. yarushe pei siki ma kui, siki iye rukekepou kupohei (cha.

same meaning as rukeai and rukepou, but in the first case it is a plurality of objects and in the second a plurality of subjects. rukeke-.

the ones who were taking refuge (on the mountain, to escape the flood) brought ocumos near with poles in order to plant them. pe he re ruonowei peni, pe niya ha tiaheni, ohina pe rekamahe.

to bring near with a pole. ruonowei.

give me a machete. ipa namo ta totopa.

give me. totopa.

these are fragile. éstas son frágiles.

fragile. frágiles.

return by the way you came. a he ta tatoru.

return by the same path, go back the way you came. tatoru.

to be partially dry, to stop being locally flooded. washitii.

to submerge oneself. shototoai.

father-in-law, he wants to come here to skin us both. shoape, pehereki si niya re ikekeaimi ye.

us two (you and me), we two (in object position). pehereki.

to emerge suddenly. shirimo.

they provoked so much thirst to Rahararitawe that he ran crying from one side to the other. rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama.

a proper name. rahararitawe.

I'm thirsty, I will drink. ya amishiripi, ya hesi kewe.

your head sinks too much (the master says to the novice during initiation). wa hesi keo no re kiriowei (cha.

to drink, to lower the head to drink (jokingly). hesi keo.

to become a widow; to lose one. shirokoprou.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to compress, to press down on; to place one object on top of another to keep it in place. thomiriyomani.

blue, bluish; violet (color). ushiushi.

I wonder if they will really return to me the value of the goods they constantly take from me. "yare matohipi hore toatii ta sihewe".

to wonder, to ask oneself. toatii.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma.

very, much. ãmonãmãriyoma.

the chigüires invited the butterflies. i pe shoamahe.

invited. shoamahe.

to make war (lit.: to take each other. tishikãyou.

when I'm up there I'll break open the beehive (with machete blows). hami ya tikeo tehe puu ya poprape.

to break into pieces (by striking from above). poprape.

the gossip, the one who tells everything they saw or heard. weorewe.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten, to make flat. taha.

It has sprouted. Puhutuai wakexi.

to sprout, to grow (new sprout, new branch). puhutuai.

to be a little heavy. fhutehe.

I do not work, I pass the time doing nothing. ya oﬁ puﬁpou tao tharei.

to pass the time doing nothing, being idle. puﬁpou.

to strangle. forãmi hiyãi.

to strangle. hiyãrei.

he does not walk fast. a haiimi.

he/she does not walk fast. haiimi.

her/his spouse. pe wãhãmapi.

her/his spouse. wãhãmapi.

The Picure woman had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). ani yorehi si patetepoma.

had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). patetepoma.

after the snake bit me while I was hunting, I had memory lapses. yahi hami ya koprou he yatirayoma, ya puhi mratamratamou ha shoaparuni.

1. To have memory lapses; to lose consciousness for moments (after an illness, snake bite). puhi mratamratamou.

it is pleasant to touch with the foot (= it is pleasant to the touch). the kapamamou totihitawe.

to be unpleasant to the touch. hupe.

to begin to be isolated, to begin to be separated. yawereprai.

to leave (through negligence) weeds to invade crops. yorukamai.

crax blumenbachii (red-ruffed crested curassow). mãru.

1. Defensive palisade around a dwelling (shapono or camp in the jungle) 2. Knife (southern Orinoco dialect). akuri.

I look for an instant. ya miprao.

Titiri was perched, at the moment when he had his tail towards the ground, Horonami shot him with a poisoned dart. titiri a rooma, e teshinaki pata ithãprao tehe horonamini a horaprarema (mit.

give me that ripe one quickly so that I can taste it. mihi wake the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa (mit.

you know very well that it doesn't dry quickly (the tobacco) (= drying tobacco requires a lot of work). the pe kãi ma re heprao haio mai.

indicates an event, act or state that lasts a short time; can also indicate an action that is executed without delay. pomoprao.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. fãshãe.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

buttocks, rear end. nalwei.

(related suffix). -ma-.

as I am generous by nature, I offered a large basket of tobacco. ya shi ihitao ha totihioni pee ke ya nahe thari pata hipek e m a.

to be generous. shi ihite.

to soak seje (a type of plant) in hot water. poshomai.

to break a limb. yaheki.

I dropped the machete. sipara ya huherema.

when they were doing that, they dropped (the basket), and it transformed into a rahara monster. thamapii tehe, a ha huhepirini rahara ki pata kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to drop, to let fall an object held in the hand. huherema.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, and thrust the point into the shaft and sat down by the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to thrust, to drive in forcefully. tisuakei.

she laughed nonstop because her insides (lit. a ikãpraroma a hushomi ha shikioni (mit. : interior) were itching. ).

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. hushomiãi.

if they kill you here (and not elsewhere), then I will grieve and take your quiver (lit. mori eyeha ke wa hore thaprai totihikemahe, pei ya wãri hore kuaprarou, pe thorapi ha yehireni ke.

quiver made from bamboo. totihikemahe.

we went among several to gather the firewood we needed (to cook) the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

firewood, to gather firewood. tharik.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki.

ser un mal tirador. simi.

to stir up water with the feet to make things on the bottom rise to the surface, to search for moriche fruits that have fallen into the water in this way. kapuyã.

I broke the end (lit. ka ya yahekikema.

The bat broke the firewood by hitting it. heweni koã ãsho yaheki.

to break, to split, to shatter. yaheki-.

que vengan (los hekura) que se ponen plumas de aves de rapiña en el lóbulo de sus orejas. pe no koikoimipi hena huuhou ta kuikiyo.

to insert something into the earlobe. huuhou.

to cover or mix with sand. mrakatahupiai.

the notch of the tree deepens. hi ka shoekeprou.

to have a notch, a crease, a bruise (after which an object runs the risk of breaking or bending). shoekerayou.

that has lasted much longer (than expected). the he piyeprariyoma.

it has lasted much longer (than expected). piyeprariyoma.

you (pl. wama pe shepe.

we will kill the otter. proro ke pema a wãri shepe.

to kill. shepe.

to decide at the last moment to join a group that is leaving. ayata-.

family. familiar.

I think I will desist. kamiye ke ya no huheprariyopi.

I will desist; I will give up. huheprariyopi.

"they sleep near here", then they said. "the pe miã re ahetarayoi e.

they sleep near here (= they will arrive soon). ahetarayoi.

disheveled, unkempt. porukua.

it was because I defended myself alone that I am still alive. kamiye re ya nohi ha peyeoni ya rii t e m i.

to defend oneself. peyeoni.

1. he paroho he piye 1 vb. intr. to fall seriously ill. ye.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to hold or carry something above one. yarehai.

he took a large stone, so wide. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

1. to widen, extend (surface), expand 2. to widen a surface 3. to be locally vast (surface). reraha.

(he/she) fanned himself/herself. yahuhuo kuk e i.

to fan oneself. yahuhuo.

look at me. a mi ta yaitaru.

look at me. yaitaru.

he wants to go live elsewhere, what does he have against me. yare thapi heiaprarai, weti ke the no peshiri ha thaani.

why do you feel resentment towards my mother-in-law. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

to feel regret or resentment for the loss of an object (lost, stolen, broken); to feel resentment or bitterness towards someone. thaani.

I did not make a mistake, I did not get tangled up (during the ceremonial speech). ya wã ma re yakei maohe, ya wã yakenomi.

to get tangled up while speaking, to make a mistake during a ceremonial dialogue. yakenomi.

I am walking. uu wakatai.

to walk. wakata.

to be dirty, to be stained with mud or covered in ashes. toteshiprou.

his father has given it to him. pe hiini a hipekema.

when the adults were absent, Jaguar killed the children (to eat them). pe hiire the pe no kupramou tehe, irani ihiru re pe shei heama (mit.

Kaw's father (the person Kaw's mouth calls father) informed us. kaw.

father, male elder relative in direct line. hiimou.

they hide (in the forest) their hammocks made of vines. thoo thotho pe ropramaihe.

to hide objects in the forest; to make several trips to hide objects in the forest. ropraamai.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness. mi pe shiwetihiãi.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness. shiwetihiãi.

to authorize or send (someone) to do something. nape shimiãi.

to authorize or send (someone) to do something; to convince (someone). shimiãi.

the ancestors had brought poles dragging them (to rebuild the house), they had cleaned the floor. porepore ke pe tãrãrãmou yaioma, the roshi thaamai yaioma.

to drag, to trail along the ground. tãrãrãmou.

ancestor, hekura associated with yoni (a type of woodpecker bird). Yopararithawe.

the white arrows of the chupacacao negro are covered with longitudinal lines. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to do it (trace longitudinal lines) on several objects. shetitirarei.

to become affected by a supernatural malefic disease associated with the vampire and attributed to leishmaniasis. washeãi.

I cannot walk fast when the pain in my thigh becomes more intense. e naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

when the pain in the thigh becomes more intense. ropaaimi.

you have seen the hekura, but they have not appreciated you (they did not come to lodge in your chest). hekura wa the pe hore tararema ma kui, wa nohiãnomihe (cha.

to come to love, to appreciate. nohiãi.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their extremities damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be damaged, to be crushed (extremity of a long object). thekehãi.

strong tobacco, spicy tobacco. nakri.

to rise up, acquire a bad position (leaves of a roof). posusukei.

to be constantly streaked by lightning (sky). yãmimo.

to be rigid under the effect of an effort. hirarao.

the two women fled. suwe ke kipi shi wahi ayoherii.

as the woman was in love with him, she fled with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

1. fugitive woman who has abandoned her community and husband (to join a lover or stop being mistreated). 2. to flee, abandon one. shiwahi.

he felt bliss and sat on the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

to feel completely well, to feel satisfaction or bliss, to be happy. tipea.

what does it matter if we are left alone: they will go hunting (lit. pei peheki yãmio peo, totori the pe taepe.

to hunt, to participate in a long collective hunt; to search for enemies (lit.: to search for a turtle). taepe.

abandoned cultivated field. hikari theka suwe pata.

to cut in two a long object. tipuruprai.

did you simply warn him. wa wã fai poohawe.

I will be content with gutting him. ya shipe niya thaai ha puoni.

to do (without caring about the consequences), to do (without apparent reason); to be content with. poohawe.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax between his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to squeeze, crush or press something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to extract juice from fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held in the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. hushiki.

extingan el incendio del techo echando agua. mãu ke uni hei yaa ke si wake misi ta rumakihe.

to extinguish, to put out (a fire). uni.

male howler monkey. paují macho.

1. male howler monkey, called that because of its cry (onomatopoeic). 2. to howl (intransitive verb). paipai.

he let his saliva drip, and then sucked it back up. kama kahu upe ukurayoma.

to let saliva drip and then suck it back up before it falls (a game played by young people under the influence of hallucinogens). ukukurayou.

to finish surpassing (in height). toreheprou.

a locative or directional form. ku-ra-ti.

to be crooked, not straight. kayareprawe.

el fuego descendía rodando velozmente a lo largo de la roca que retumbaba. pei maki pata wake nihorãi ha kuparuni, pei maki pata frãrãrãmou ha kuthoni (mit.

retumbaba. kuthoni.

they had grabbed it without realizing (along with other objects). pe tea hãrorema.

as an arrowhead had unfortunately struck one of his children (during the confrontation), we threatened each other. ãtãri ãhini pe ihirupi a ha hãroprariheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

to do something inadvertently, clumsily or unfortunately. hãrorema.

to hang low, to hang with a long rope. preyukou.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) for a moment to look for something underneath them. hãshãetai.

preparar varios paquetes de comida para cocinarlos sobre las brasas. hãrohãromou.

before there was no water, there were no rivers. hapa mãu u pe kuonomi, hei parau pe re kui u pe kuonomi.

water. kuonomi.

their arrows do not reach the whites, they just graze them (= they are poor shooters). ke maima si ki matohipi mãihimapou totihiowei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

not reach. mãihimapou.

niece, I'm going to break the dry branches (hitting them against the ground) to warm myself. shete, pokopokoye ke ya wãri yahekiai.

dead wood, dry branch. pokopokoye.

older sibling of the same sex. pataye.

past tense marker indicating a past event more than one day ago. -roi.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it above everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

to rise above, become bigger than. morokou.

to widen; to make an object with a wide surface. thepahamai.

to be very little greasy. ftapihihi.

to limp. keyehewe.

I have the habit of wrapping a thick vine (around my ankles) because they generally wear out quickly (when climbing or descending a palm tree). prowehewe ke ya thotho pe motorewe thapou tharei, the pe kãi waruhou si ihehewe.

to wear out, to become worn out (by friction). waruhou.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahaakei.

despite everything I slipped between the cut trees. kayapa hiki mohe re yoare hami ya hirerea he yatikema.

to slip under, to slide under. hirereai.

the mashohara plant comes towards you, moving at ground level. mashohara henaki wayu re urerope ye.

a cultivated plant; Blechum sp. (Acantaceae). It is attributed hallucinogenic properties, inhaled mixed with yakoana.. mashohara.

I was looking at the bamboo-tipped arrows that were directed against us. ya mamo shatioma, rahaka ke peki re puruhuoperei.

were directed against us. puruhuoperei.

disheveled, unkempt. porukua.

(synonym). hãto nahi.

to have bulging eyes (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). mamoku si yeheye.

while Danta was climbing up (on a branch), everyone started to climb up. shamariwe ke a pata ha tikeparuhuruni, komi the pe tuoma.

to climb up one after another. tikeparuhuruni.

he insisted on calling me again and then I had a desire to accompany him. yare nakai he yatioma, ya ohotatariyoma.

to have a desire for something one did not previously want. ohotatariyoma.

when it is cut, it is extremely tough and viscous (the flesh of the disease demon). the ki pata hãnimou yoripi yihitiwe no kirii (cha.

consistency or texture that a substance has when it is cut. hãnimou.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (a stick, stakes, a piece of wood). yakekeprai.

he took the fibers of the basket and started weaving. yorofi ke mishiki re furihireiwei, e the tiyema.

fibers for weaving a basket. furihireiwei.

to divide into two parts by tearing or separating a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hahathoprai.

to place the two closed fists between the thighs and against the genitals (to protect oneself). fimiki huuhuo.

to place the two closed fists between the thighs and against the genitals (to protect oneself). hishã.

tree. pore.

he grabbed the fire, but did not manage to rise (= but did not manage to get up). wake teai ma kui a isipronomi (mit.

not to rise, not to grow, not to sprout. isiproimi.

"you missed your shots at them (downstream)", I thought. "wama pe posi hore wãri re waaprapiyekiri", ya puhi kuma.

downstream, there where the rock is, that's where they usually go to fish for big fish. hei ma re ithãã totihipiyekiri ha, iha yuri pata yokepraaihe.

to be located elsewhere, downstream. piyekiri.

spirit associated with the coati, very brave. yarusheriwe.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

destroy, damage. wãriãprai.

his arrows always hit the target. a yaketoi mi.

to hit the target, to leave a mark. imiki*.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantities. yateheprai.

as Amoãyoma wants to be under it, the leaves of the tree of songs beautify it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro, pei ke hena noshi re hariape ye.

female spirit associated with the ãmoã tree. ãmoãyoma.

to separate definitively from the community to go live elsewhere. shekereprou.

to get tangled in vegetation. warawaramou.

to pleat (durative, plural object). wãhimai.

he speaks to him shouting (from the south of the Orinoco). yare nowã rayemai mahei.

to address someone shouting, to speak to someone dominated by anger. rayemai.

she was going from one place to another and her laughter was always moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

to go from one place to another, not to stay still. reshiprou.

no les amarren cuchillos en la punta. hii ke hi shironi.

cuchillos. shironi.

a handful. ãpuñado.

several objects. aushiprawe.

to damage, to lose. wãri maﬁ.

to damage, to lose. maﬁ.

a burrow. hitikai.

if only I could drink fresh water. ya the u ha koarini.

if only there was a stream of water nearby. pei the u aheteprao ha yairini.

to. ha.

to carry leftovers home. sheerei.

leaves of tobacco in the fields (it is a sign that the plant is vigorous). ushuhou.

yellow-crested flycatcher; Tyrannulus elatus (Tyrannidae). Its song announces the disease demons (shawara). hoimi.

I would have liked to go to see the house (of the enemies), but unfortunately it was prohibited for me; I would have killed them, but it was prohibited for me (talking about the south of the Orinoco). biera gustado ir a ver la casa (de los enemigos), pero lamentablemente me lo prohibieron; ya pe mori shema, ware a wasimahe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to go to see the house (of the enemies), but unfortunately it was prohibited; I would have killed them, but it was prohibited. wapeke.

(pei). hitho.

he returned to his house. kama ke e shapono hami a koprou shoarayoma.

he. kama.

she was called Honey Woman and was very beautiful. yãmonãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a wãri kuoma.

Honey Woman. Mujer-miel.

black horsefly (unidentified animal). wãreware ãsi.

black horsefly (unidentified animal). wãware.

kill without hesitating. puhi asimopimi.

renounce to an aggression or a vengeance (perfective). puhi asimorayou.

not renounce ever to a vengeance or aggression. asimo.

to be arched in a natural form. krehethewe.

to put the chest to be hit by an adversary. totopariyo.

to be a supernatural malefic being of the yai the type related to whirlpools. motoheriwe.

"Where is my loincloth part. "weti ipa napeyoma ke a. Did you tear yours into two strips (to offer me one). wa siki sheririprarihawe. ". ".

to tear or rip lengthwise into two pieces. sheririprai.

to move around. cucli-.

to have a wrinkled forehead, to have a worried look. yakuku.

to start to turn something over, to start to invert something. hemihiprai.

I was afraid and startled: it was completely clean, brother-in-law. the auprariyoma: se pumaki yasuai totihikeyoruu, shori.

completely clean. totihikeyoruu.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their tools, their tools did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slide without penetrating (the blade of a tool in poor condition). pahehãmahe.

when the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to be hardened, twisted, deformed completely. tosheshewe.

I accompany the others downriver to the conuco. hikari hami ya ta hu nareokiri sho.

to accompany, to go with others. nareokiri.

the Yanomami occupy a vast region. yãnomãmi the ki perihiwe praukuwe.

the skin of the snake karahiri is wide. karahiri siki pata re praukupe ye.

to be vast, extensive; to be wide. praukuprawe.

to reflect on something, to seek a solution. imikou.

goods for exchange (during a wayamou). thomipi.

the ancestors transformed into sloths. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

transformed into sloths. ihamarariyo.

to make someone inhale a hallucinogenic substance through a hollow tube. shoimou.

The mapanares have come here to raise their heads. aroami ke ki oraki re yareheikiyohe e ye.

a type of venomous snake. mapanare.

thus it is called yopo and also it can be The word 'así' in Yanomami means 'in this way'. e naha hi ma niopo.

thus, in this way, like this. así.

to turn one. fririhitou.

cut sticks and use them as levers to drag it along the ground (in this phrase yaro refers to a human being). hii wama hi ha perarini, yaro a hore hamorimai ta poohe she.

use as a lever. hamorimai.

to place a thick layer of leaves on a roof to waterproof it. sutamapei.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to curve, to bend into an arc shape. payokai.

while living in company of the yawari I possessed beads. ya rãmi hunomi ya mamiki nikereo tehe tope e pe kuoma.

to mix, blend, combine. ni-.

when it is cut, it is extremely tough and viscous (the flesh of the disease demon). the ki pata hãnimou yoripi yihitiwe no kirii (cha.

to be completely dry and hard. yihitiwe.

upstream speech. ãpuru uﬁ.

speech. uﬁ.

as they wanted to protect the women, all the men had mixed with them (in the group on the march). the pe nohi niya hore ha peyeaheni, suwe re pe rii hami wãro re the ki komi re nikererayoheriiwei.

they had mixed with them (the women). nikererayoheriiwei.

to repair a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakai.

to tear, rip, divide into several pieces (plural object). kakararei.

the ground broke right at the edge where the ugly man was squatting. wãritiwe the wãri re roowei ha a mashitha hetia re he wetirayouwei.

to break, crack, or split in multiple places; to reach the limit or edge (of a surface). wetirayouwei.

several concave marks on multiple objects. wãhihirariyo.

he went there to cut a young bamboo (for making blowgun darts), he set off again, and saw some Yanomami. rihu u ha oshe hãnireheruni, a hua ha koroherini, yãnomãmi a tararema.

to cut a young bamboo (for making blowgun darts). hãnireheruni.

(he/she/it) looks just like another. a no wãri yokapi mrai.

that cannot be confused, that looks like two drops of water. yokapimi.

null. kaweima.

to separate. separar.

he cut a short stick and put it as an extension (of a branch). horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tikemakema.

to put a short stick as an extension (of a branch). peprarini.

I have been seated and angry for a while. ya hushuori kãi rotaa.

to be seated and angry. rotaa.

do it without wasting an instant. the ta thaa moyaweaprara.

as they had harvested honey without wasting time, we drank it (mixed with water, as a drink). puu u pe thaa ha moyaweapotuheni, yama u pe koarar e m a.

to do quickly, to do without wasting time. moyaweaprara.

as they wanted to take possession of his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

I took the gallineta (bird) from a hawk (that had killed it). koikoimi iha hãshimo ya he rumakema.

to take possession of (a man. rumakema.

to be extremely cold, to be chilled to the bone. kohipi.

he kept the tobacco pouch on the stone axe handle. poo ke hetho ha pee nahe makepoma.

he carried a large stone on his shoulder. maa ke ma pata makepoherima.

to place an object on top of another; to carry an object on top of another; to carry on the shoulder. makerei.

some reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

they reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). iheteaharayou.

(speaks of upriver). kremonene.

to flatten. make-.

he does not gain weight quickly. a preprao haiomi.

to have a strong desire to sleep. fmaharishi preprou.

to feel the effects of a substance strongly. fwayu preai.

to intensify, to increase, to grow, to develop, to expand (a cavity). preprou.

those fruits have no flavor, the pulp is insipid. pe ki oketiwe, pe ki shãhe okewe.

to have no flavor, to be insipid. oketiwe.

to soften (the ground), to become muddy. kaweheai.

speak in a low voice, whisper. wahatoai.

they will go out hunting with their dogs, and they will eat meat. wamaki yaropi wãri krothakrothamope: shemani.

they will eat. shemani.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to be arranged in a circular manner, to form an arc. watowe.

I am the one who will take the funerary gourd to the inhabitants of Wanapiwei. hei wanapiwei theri ha kamiyeni ai ke ya hishima yehipou totihiope.

who are you, who lives on the visible side of Mount Wanapiwei (on the slope facing us). kihi wanapiwei a pariki ha, weti wa wãri ta rora ke.

a place name. wanapiwei.

dreams. sueños.

the hekura started to smile. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma o a kasi watetou yakea ayakema.

to laugh, to smile. ikã.

to flee, to take refuge in. proruru.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

to glance at it. echarle.

to take only objects of the same type. irokei.

I twist cotton. shinari ya uku mohe poprai.

to roll, twist. poai.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

let's put forked branches on the pu. rãhãrã pema pe ta hiima.

to fix at the end (by tying, nailing, etc.); to tie a hook to the end of a fishing line, to put a point on an arrow, etc.. hiiãi.

it was at a moment of the day, identical to this [in which we find ourselves (= at the same time)] that I left for my son's house. hei nashomi naha oãsiwe ihami ya ayoma.

my younger brother, my son. oãsiwe.

spacious, unoccupied (in a dwelling). hikoko.

the frog approaches the cockroach furtively (to eat it). yoyoni horã hesi a nape prakeo.

to approach furtively. prakeo.

go get my capuchin monkey's tail immediately. wishaye ke teshina ta koãi shoaohoru.

capuchin monkey. wishaye.

he cut the inner curved part of the palm petiole to make a basket. yei wa siki hãkãmi ha karoprarini, pehe amo ta uke.

to cut. uke-.

They (two) spread epidemics in an extensive region. no wãri a aka praukumapii shoaoma.

extensive region. praukumapii.

the door is misaligned (it cannot close correctly). yoka yokahawe.

not fit, be misaligned. yokahawe.

to become as big as, to become equal to. he usuku.

to turn away one's gaze. miã hã rakiprou.

to turn away one. rakipro.

the váquiros have straight and pointed ears. ware pe yimikaki hiyekewe.

to have open ears (insulting). fyimikaki sheshehewe.

ear. yimikaki.

it is your arrow. sherekahe ke a.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

stay sleeping while they make love with your wife. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo (mit.

your. RN.

give something to someone in its entirety. haiye!.

to look at with mamo tete. mamo repoo.

to look at with. repoo.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the tapirs scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

disperse (and make parallel rows). pe mi ta yoããheri.

to scatter, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããi.

they went when it dawned. tehe mi ukekou pe hurayoma.

they went. ukekeprou.

to split tobacco leaves along the central vein (durative, plural object). pee nahe repokosimai.

to split a tobacco leaf along the central vein (durative, plural object). repokosimai.

they killed peccaries and gave the broth of the stew to drink (= they killed peccaries and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

to produce a dry sound by moving the jaws (referring to the peccary). hunenemo.

half-closed eye. wãtetewe.

to do it with a quiver (the deceased is a man). thora no kãi preaprarou.

to cry for a dead person by dancing in the central plaza of the dwelling while carrying an object that belonged to them. matohi*.

they met, without knowing it, at Honey's hearth. yãmonãmãriwe ke hãtopi nahi ha ke kipi re kuariyonowei.

he went out skirting the hammocks hung under the roof of the house. hãto ke nahi pariki hami e ayoherima.

hearth. hãtopi.

those who sing saying yau kwã kwã kwã. ei ki re yaukuwemouwei.

song of the diostedé rabadilla dorada or piapoco bird. yau kwã kwã....

the snake eggs are clumped (form clusters). oru ke ki nathe shimokore.

to swell slightly (like the skin after an insect bite). shimokoreprou.

to crouch resting the heels on a log. pariparima.

poles that are placed on the side of the roof of a temporary shelter. Both rest on the triangle formed by the initial structure. pariparima.

I saw that they were directing their arrows with bamboo tips towards us. rahaka re pe ki re puhuruoperei.

their arrows with bamboo tips. puhuruoperei.

they have blown (a magical substance) at us. wãri horashikei ma re kuhahei.

to blow (a magical substance) at someone. horashikei.

to make something collapse or crumble in a place. hishishikei.

to let a fire go out, to let it extinguish gradually (by ceasing to feed it). wãnonãmai.

to have a palpitating stomach. fãmoku preipreiw e.

stomach. fãmoku.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other. nonohãi.

the bananas are planted (too) close together. kuratha siki tia no shatitiwe.

to plant tightly, to plant close together. kothethe.

to order. lar.

to go back and forth several times to transport objects from a canoe to land. hashiripraamai.

my words will make you dream. ya kahiki ã no thapipi keope.

to make someone dream. keope.

if you are always disputing with them, the Yanomami will take your footprint to make sorcery against you. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi wa the pe hore peyeprai si perihi ihehea ha.

to dispute with someone, to scold, to get angry with someone. peyeprai.

he is angry. iwa kretepi hi.

to be angry. kretepi.

the maize began immediately to grow in an extensive area (myth) (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). yono mo haa aka praukua re shoarayoheriiwei (mit.

to expand, enlarge, become extensive. prauku.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

to deposit, to decant, to form a deposit. papehai.

to extract a piece from a whole by cutting (hitting). pakaroai.

the termites will hollow out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororoprarei.

to hollow out, to make a hole. hororokei.

they will shoot several arrows at you. wa kãi taitaimai kukeihe.

they will shoot arrows at you. kukeihe.

to slit the abdomen of an animal (fish or mammal), to empty it. ekoka.

my dog is a good hunter. thariye a suhirina.

good hunter. thariye.

some little birds fly away, even though they are mortally wounded. ai kirithami waharo pe yeoprou: algunos pajaritos se vuelan, aunque estén heridos de muerte.

to be between life and death. niyaiwei.

I sit or I am seated (depending on context). ya roo.

to sit. roo.

the rope of the canoe is not untied. kanawa a natha kusheami.

to become untied, to come undone. kusheprou.

I place the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

1. To place a deep container on the ground; to offer food that is inside a deep container. 2. To get into the water, to be in the water.. ithoo.

"I have just killed the beast", he said. "yaro ke ya re prakihe ye", a kuma.

to kill. prakihe.

I carry the logs in my arms. koã ya ãsho rerepou.

to carry long objects in both arms against the chest. rerepou.

to undulate, to wave (surface of water). senisenimou.

Woodpecker clung abruptly to a curare vine and pecked it. mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

to hang upside down; to dangle. yautaai.

you have had a slip of the tongue. wa aka tihekia re yaipe.

to habitually make mistakes while speaking. aka tihekiwe.

to make a mistake while speaking, to have a slip of the tongue. tiheki.

to do it several times, to print several hands. raikai.

edible fruit of the pasho ãhuhi shrub. ãhuhi.

the lateral branches of the trees that are inclined towards the ground have hollow fruits. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni.

lateral branches of trees that are inclined towards the ground, have hollow fruits. yãhutãi.

we climbed the mountain and reached the summit. yamaki mi re yãmopeheriiwei, yamaki mi re totoparekiriowei.

we reached the summit. totoparekiriowei.

yo le había prevenido, desgraciadamente él se empecinó. ya wã ma fai tehe kama re the fe prakekou tikoo kuhe.

to be stubborn, to insist. prakeke.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their instruments, their instruments did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slip without penetrating (a blade in poor condition). pãheheãi.

Honey produced by the wãmorã na bee. It is sweet.. wãmorã.

they placed a platform high up, and climbed onto it (to ambush). isi ha kana ãki ha thapikini a nohi tikepopima.

small platform made of parallel sticks tied with transverse sticks, fixed to a tree for hunters to ambush certain animals. tikepopima.

the (old) thin woman was curled up in her hammock. poreporeyoma ke te wãri tureketaoma, the wãri puushitaoma.

was thin/skinny. tureketaoma.

to be afraid. haikiami.

the night extended. the mi titi yopramai ha shoaroher i n i.

to extend, to spread out. shoaroher.

to place oneself in the center. tharirayou.

he is the one who wants to kill you and with that intention he got a bamboo tip. ihini re wa riyã matamai ha totihioni wa pehi tea totihirei kurei.

to kill, to make disappear. totihirei.

frec. suwe thaaprai.

to have the habit of using magic substances (heri) against women. thaa.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). eiwe.

to tell someone to wait, to tell someone to do something later. waihamou.

"Try this, you two", said Toucan (myth). "kahe ke wahekini the ta wapepraapi", mayepirithawe a no wã thamahe.

try (you two). wapepraapi.

to snort water through the nose. t u fririãi.

to snort water through the nose, generally to remove hallucinogenic residue from the nostrils after heavy consumption. fririãi.

the water hinders their progress but they return to put foot on dry land. mau ke u ha a shi wãripariyo kuhe, a hashiria re kokeheriiwei.

to put foot on dry land one after another. kokeheriiwei.

to start doing something persistently or gradually. yãshiprai.

to have one's face painted with red annatto dye. mi momihimou.

to have one. momihimou.

the Yanomami disappeared in all places due to measles. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

anywhere, everyone is currently in scarcity. hei tehe pe the pe oheo totihiomopotayou.

to disperse and repeat an event over a distance. mraomopotayoma.

they ate it. a waremahe.

they ate it. waremahe.

to be or to exist (in the present tense). kure.

when he was young and importuned the women, he always remained in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to remain, to constitute a remainder. hushuani.

nocturnal curassow; Nothocrax urumutum (Cracidae). katara.

to start hollowing out a gourd or squash to make a container. hopokoprai.

to be pregnant (animal). hushuprarou.

vine, Anomospermum sp. (Menispermaceae), a bitter vine used in preparation. patema.

to become blunt, to become dull. pohoto.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihãi.

they did not manage to easily lift the large rock. no lograron levantar fácilmente la gran roca.

rock. roca.

Titiri was perched, at the moment when his tail was pointing downwards, Horonami shot him with a poisoned dart. titiri a rooma, e teshinaki pata ithãprao tehe horonamini a horaprarema.

for a short time, momentarily. ithãprao.

exhausted (something) by giving it away. nohi mraakei.

to exhaust a good by giving it away to others. nohi mra.

while he was occupied, he glanced briefly at his son-in-law who was raising his face towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

son-in-law. nikereroni.

to have hair that is too long, to the point that it covers the nape. potoshiwe.

to move away, to distance oneself for a moment (to avoid a prohibited relative). prahaprao.

pedir ser invitado. wã no ohiãmou.

to invite. ohiãmou.

to take an object without looking at the person. mamoku si he nohoãi.

to take an object without looking at the person. nohoãi.

to be inundated. hashiriprou.

to strain to defecate or fart. wãthemou.

they had stood side by side, and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to stand side by side, to be standing one next to the other. thãriritariyo.

the sky has cleared. the hiwatua.

to have become bright, luminous; to be clear or luminous locally. hiwatua.

Õmawe and his brother went in a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they then lived downstream, there where the Orinoco goes under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

to describe a curve while moving, to go in a curve. tihiyei.

do not take many of those leaves (of that plant), the Yawari prohibit touching them. toai mai, henaki nowã thapou, yawari peni.

those leaves (of that plant). toai mai.

as the woman was in love with him, she fled with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

to make a woman flee or facilitate her escape; to flee in the company of a woman one loves. wahiai.

(habla de río arriba. maana hi.

(speaks of upriver). maana.

he left. a ha ipire.

to go, to leave. ipire-.

shrub, guachamacá, Bonafousia tetrastachys (Apocynaceae). Its fruit is edible.. tetrastachys.

the chiggers (nested in the toes) make him walk on his heels. hihu napeni a mamiki kayetimou.

heels. napeni.

he is making a lot of noise (myth). the ka naki mrai tehe yotenama a pahetiraremahe.

he is making a lot of noise. pahetiraremahe.

(he) grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear off. huhetirei.

(myth): he caught a small monster rahara, grabbed it, and then offered it to the Yanomami (as a pet). keki ha yukuni yãnomãmi pe rii ha keki hipea shoapeheroma (mit.

small monster. rahara.

Have you killed one of my male relatives, have you made him disappear. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

to shake lightly and laterally a bamboo arrowhead to remove it from the arrow shaft into which it is inserted. hãweteãi.

diluted honey. rehere uku.

diluted, thinned out, less concentrated, less thick. rehere.

ellos quedaron tullidos sobre el suelo. the pata shikopi praa re hekeiwei.

tullidos, debilitados, sin fuerzas. hekeiwei.

to put a pole between two trees to pass from one to the other. ihirãkei.

to cut one's own hair. miki peyemou.

to cut someone. peyema.

Mujer-oso hormiguero, cuyos pelos pubianos son largos y bien visibles, era su suegra. teperiyoma e weshipe he re hapramouwei.

dispersed, scattered. weshipe.

my head hurts from the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to have experienced a painful sensation due to a superficial injury (an irritation, a skin tear, a burn, a blister, etc.). hushirariyo.

to refuse to answer, to refuse to speak. wãhã hayumai.

to do repeatedly, to do in several opportunities. hayumai.

to be hungry. toumo.

the great jaguar arrived, it is said that it moved its tail. ira a pata warokema, e shina wãhã yãweyãwemoma.

it is said that it moved its tail. yãweyãwemoma.

to develop these white spots on the body. tyoapiai.

white spots on the body caused by a fungal infection. yoapi.

tree (unidentified). hapakawe.

when felling an apia tree, I crushed the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

to crush by hitting with a stick, to perform a task by hitting with a stick (e.g. washing a hammock by beating it to remove dirt, hitting a plant to extract fibers). yatikiai.

she woke up and left him (where he was). the wãri hoketariyowei, the wãri takeherii.

the child did not go down and he abandoned him. ihiru a ithonomi, a takeherima (mit.

to abandon someone on the way. ftakeherii.

to have been painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. rakiramokei.

to start breastfeeding. aka hesi keo.

to breastfeed (a baby). aka hesi ke.

to have used the aphrodisiac to seduce a woman. kumirei.

hang your hammock there, where it was hung before. ke ki re yãoperei ha wa ha thaa ha koparuni.

to hang. yãoperei.

brother-in-law, for what reason should I tell them not to go to the party. shoriwe weti the ha pe rii a maihãi ma yaio.

to tell others to reject an invitation. wã maihãi.

Jaguar raised his eyes (towards him). ira ke a mi pata nonotou re shoarayonowei.

raised the eyes. shoarayonowei.

I decorated the bamboo tip with various geometric motifs. rahaka ya mi onimai.

to paint geometric motifs on someone. oniãi.

a man set up his shelter on the path of Siroromiwe. siroromiwe ke a no mãyo hami poreri ke a peria ha reparuni (mit.

Path, trail or mark left by a particular being (real or supernatural). Siroromiwe.

bird, tanager. ushuwemi.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. noshi tãihiãi.

to grate (upriver speech). hikri.

they send their hekura against Titiri. titiri a hapeihe.

to send one. hapei.

to be partially widened towards the edge. ehetea.

I put a lid on the pot. hapoka ya si ka he k a h u a i.

He obstructed the cavity where Hairless Rabbit was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

to close, to cover an opening. kahum.

he wants to go live somewhere else, what does he have against me. yare thapi heiaprarai, weti ke the no peshiri ha thaani.

why do you feel resentment towards my mother-in-law. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

to feel regret or resentment towards someone for the loss of an object (lost, stolen, broken). heiaprarai.

to become sterile due to shapo. shapopiai.

he moaned. ihiru a re ãkãmiãmou.

moan, whimper. ãkãmiãm o u.

he/she died (lit. fmishiã a kuami.

to have short breath, not blow hard enough. fmishiã hawe.

to die (lit. fmishiã mrai.

to hold one's breath. fmishiãki mao.

breath, respiration, life force. fmishiã.

to put a pole between two trees to pass from one to the other. ihirãkei.

here is where it appeared for the first time. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

they arrived and gathered. e pe re shimoopareyorunowei.

he fell ill and almost died. a ha perini a mori nomarayoma.

to appear, to happen. -riyo-.

Ouch!. hosã!.

to start to crawl (after having been motionless). yonirayou.

to declare that one wants to kill someone. warapa.

to enjoy sexually. shi wãri.

the pulp of the mahei tree. mahei pe shãhe.

it seems that no one missed their target, all return with a guan. wãri ai the norãmi yakemai mahei, paruri pe kãi pata koã haikitapeihe.

a type of tree. mahei.

I have slippery hands and things keep slipping out of them. ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

he lowered the turtle (making it slide along its support) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to slide down, to slip down. yohotai.

to be performing maneuvers to approach the shore (from a canoe). katimou.

they transformed into birds. horãma ke pe kuprariyoma (mit.

to transform. horãma.

Õmawe advanced crouched (in order not to be seen), and crouched down. omawe a ha teretereikuni, a yerekema.

to advance crouched (in order not to be seen). teretereikuni.

upstream (of a river). feaiwei.

hacerse pintar por otro. onimamou.

the women went there to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. hurohuro.

he immediately made the call to the hekura (and said): "I make my dog come back to life". a tutomou shoaoma: "ipa yaro ya horiprai ta kuparu".

call made to the hekura at the beginning of a shamanic session; call made to the hekura by a shaman who has just been initiated. pokomiãi.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock one after the other. yakataai.

to soften, to loosen, to make flexible by moistening. homarei.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood erect, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

standing close together. shirikou.

1. to scrape with the teeth, 2. to scrape the pulp of a fruit with the teeth (to eat it). wahewahemo.

changing (adolescent); having a hoarse voice (from having shouted too much or after having participated in a ceremonial dialogue). peherããi.

not fully dried (firewood). wahawe (leña).

half-cooked, not fully cooked/dried. wahawe.

I claim the goods, while the demons of dusk reject my hands. weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hãiihe tehe, ya ta nako sho.

Brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do we will run over each other. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to push away, reject someone, run over. hãiãi.

the hekura pursued them and they disappeared. hekura peni pe ha yashuprariheni pe mrarayoma.

they pursued and disappeared. yashuprariheni.

central part of the sky. ãmo misi.

to dye red, to make something red. hoko.

you will not get a large pot if you do not make cotton skeins. shinari wama the uko thaprai mao tehe parãikana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

aluminum pot. parãikana.

he is happy. reorima siki.

to be happy. reorima.

to put above. yutehamai.

female spirit associated with powerful hallucinogenic drugs. ayukumariwe.

mantener apretado o trancado entre dos objetos. wãkipou.

to be greedy (lit. fhoperiwe imiki re humipe.

to close the fist, to be greedy. humipe.

in his house I hung my hammock in the direction of the central plaza of the dwelling (from the lower to the upper part of the roof of the dwelling). kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

to hang. tou.

to hurt (oneself). yutukuai.

he was certain that he had an axe and also it can be The word 'puhipou' in Yanomami means 'to miss, to long for'. hãyokoma a kua ya puhipoma.

to be convinced, to have certainty. puhipou.

eat fish. yuri pe ta warihe.

eat. warihe.

are you going to decide to probe the armadillo's burrow. wamaki re tuo waikiwe, wamaki hipai re waikipohori.

to probe. hipi.

he transports his two children in the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemapou.

to transport an object placed on top of another; to transport a child seated on a load; to transport in a canoe. tikemamapou.

to be damaged locally (a fruit). pe1.

I took the fish out of the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

to take something out of a canoe. hashiriakei.

when the fire (of the disease demons) falls like rain on the ground, it is as if a succession of waves break. the ki wake sharirou tehe, hawe pe u sheyepraaihe re urekupraowei (cha.

to crash (of water). ureku.

inflorescence of the konopo palm. konopo ãthe: inﬂorescencia de la palma konopo si.

inflorescence of the konopo palm. konopo ãthe.

deja de agitarte. a ta yãnikitaru.

stop agitating yourself. yãnikitamai.

to be little fleshy (a fruit). fyãhihiwe.

the woman was sitting on the sand. mrakatahu a kuope ha suwe a tirereoma.

to sit down on the ground. tirerekei.

sinuous stream. u shãkoko ushipiri.

sinuous stream. shãkoko.

to become short. horotoai.

dispárenle flechas, que se muera. yama a wãri si hetimarema ke, a wãri ta mataru.

to kill with a weapon, to kill by wounding (lit.: to split the skin). mataru.

he opened a path pushing away the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to reject someone brusquely. hãiprakei.

(related word). makehe.

to make vomit. yoruhamai.

attention. e su raia ta tikothoheri (mit. the voice of them community. ).

attention. tikothoheri.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantity. yatehou.

he was in his hammock and was swinging himself with his foot while whistling. the husi heã wãri kayerikayerimou yaioma.

to swing/rock each other by pushing with the foot while in hammocks. kayerimayou.

there is a smell of váquiros. ware ke ki ni waua.

to be present (smell). waua.

he offered the back of his knee (and said): "bite me here". a mathami totoma: "eyeha the ta wetiki".

back of the knee. mathami.

listen well. yimika ta hoyãpari.

listen attentively. hoyãparei.

in the moment when he had his tail pointing to the ground, Ho- itho ronami killed him. pe teshinapi ithãprao tehe horonami a waikai shoaoma (mit.

to place on the ground. Ho-.

to feel stings in the head after having walked a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe.

to vibrate, to experience small shakes; to sway. tirikio.

go away, get going, I started to feel chills (= I'm sick). pei ye, kuhamihe she, ya si re sãihipraruhe.

to shiver, feel chills. si sãihi.

you will take these arrows when you participate in a long hunting trip. wa henimou ha wa ki pope.

go to the place where we have gone hunting and kill tapirs. hei koro ha pemaki ta henimoprei hami, wamaki ha hur oherini, ware ki ta niyaprari.

to participate in a long hunting trip. henimop.

tobacco. shama.

ripe plantain honey (a plantain compote mixed with the ashes of a deceased person). tate puu.

to ripen (only for plantains and peach palms). tatei.

to smear, stain, dirty with clay or earth. kroapiamai.

to be clear, limpid, translucent, white. herushia.

tree. mamohi.

to cut in two a long object. tipuruprai.

to move through dense vegetation and not be visible. hithetherayou.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (a stick, stakes, a piece of wood). yakekeprai.

noise, sound. horã.

he will prepare a basket of tobacco, which you always lack. pee nahe thari thapraiwe, wa ma re horimou tharei.

I don't have any more of that. ya horiprou waik i a.

your wives deny you tobacco and keep you needing it. suwepihe pe shi ha imaoni pee ke wama nahe pe ha horipoheni.

to need something; to be lacking something. thapraiwe.

s h o r o r i: aquatic people associated with the s h o r o birds; they live near waterfalls and rapids, on the high banks of rivers. s h o r o r i: pueblo acuático asociado a la aves s h o r o; vive cerca de las cascadas y los raudales, en la ribera alta de los ríos.

aquatic people associated with the shoro birds. shorori.

to breastfeed a child. shatimarei.

they shot numerous arrows at a fat tapir in a pond. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, wawewawe praope ha.

to shoot numerous bamboo-tipped arrows repeatedly. shekishekiprao.

I will kill it, I will make it cook (turning the broth), then I will eat it, I will eat it. ya wai ta yaio, ya wai ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

turning the broth. rerante.

Horemariwe's penis penetrated under the ground and then went through the tender casupo leaves (on which the woman was sitting). horemariwe moroshi si re pokeiwei, mokoroma re hena tuku ha "toso.

a mythological figure or character. horemariwe.

Cook the yuca and give it to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to give food to someone. iyamarei.

(name of a tree). yopo.

to be constantly turning over in a hammock. mi hatuhatumou.

to turn over several times in a hammock. mi hatumou.

to turn over, to turn around; to change sides in a hammock. hatuo.

Siroromi crushed his entire body, and when he had finished he stuck his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

I am mashing the banana. tate ya hutikai.

to crush, mash, grind with fingers. hutika.

children, do not come to mix with us. pashikiprarotihe.

to line up behind. ãyoripraai.

Siroromi crushed his whole body, and when he had finished he stuck his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

1. to quickly add ashes to the hallucinogenic yopo powder. 2. to quickly make a bowstring by rolling the fiber on the thigh with the palm of the hand.. hitiki.

to separate from a woman. ãmo*.

I was stung by a twenty-four without realizing it. shihoni ware the tikai totihionoma.

stung. tikai.

to teach a small child to speak, to tell how to name objects. wã hira.

the woman was seated on the sand. mrakatahu a kuope ha suwe a tirereoma.

to sit or be seated on the ground. tirereo.

Moro approached (the tree hollow), went inside and ate the honey. moro a ha ihetaruni a rukea ha shoariherini, puu u pe watayoma.

to approach, to get close. ihetaruni.

one person. mamokahiwe.

one. mokahi.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying and swinging the torso and arms a lot. rahurahumou.

to become smooth, to smooth out. frakah.

I stopped taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

because they had not wanted to desist, they began to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma (mit.

to renounce doing something; to stop doing what one used to do. tira.

he hid his blowgun, which he left placed at the Place-of-the-Woman-Who-Has-Her-Period. makini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma.

the place where the woman who has her period stays. romapoma.

after that you will put other logs on top. ai ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

to put on top, to cover, to envelop. heakamamai.

he wants to share the food of others and now he likes this house (where he is treated well). a ni niya ha rioni pe yahi puhiprai waikirayoma re.

to start using a new substance (tobacco, hallucinogen) or to eat a food that one did not want before. puhiprai.

he shot an arrow at a little bird and the arrow got stuck (in the tree branches). kirithami a pehi ha niyakini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot at a target, to aim at a specific location. niyakini.

to be heard clearly (noise, voice); to isolate, separate something; to do something alone. yawerekei.

that one who lives in Yeprope (a community), he is the one who killed him. hei yeprope theri a wãri re periore, ihi a wãri ma kuini, ihini a thora ha kushereni.

to untie the cotton hammock (lit. yii ke ki kusheai.

to kill a man (to untie a quiver). kusheai.

dormirse inmediatamente. miprakei.

the small stream of water becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to terminate abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horokoprou.

maintain a prohibition. wapekepou.

to carry a load by supporting it on the shoulders with a strap. pakataamai.

he wears a capuchin monkey tail around his head. wisha shina a yohopou.

to put something around one. yohorei.

to damage or destroy something by kicking (a round object). kahathokei.

to cry, weep. miãpou.

as they did not stop committing incest with their daughters, they remained in the dark (= the day did not dawn). pe yaweremotii ha kuparuni, pe he titirayoma (mit.

they did not stop committing incest with their daughters. yaweremotii.

to make darker (a dye). ishimai.

who is there when it's night. hei a titi re kui, weti a wãri roani.

to be, to live, to inhabit a certain place. roani.

became scarce. resheshãrayou.

to improve (state of health). wãnono.

to dirty a place, make it repugnant. no kiriamai.

they also killed crax birds for their wing feathers (lit. paruri imisi pe kãi niyama.

feathers of the crax bird used for arrow fletching. ashiashirimi.

to allow someone to possess a canoe. kãtãpou.

to possess a canoe. tãpou.

to break a banana or plantain stem with a rigid pointed object (bow or stick) in order to collect the bunch it bears. tihekikei.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway. the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

they escaped. yatioherii.

they had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni (mit.

had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer). yaiomopotayowei.

to cause to disperse or diverge. rãkokoprãmãi.

in the moment when Lagarto had just gone behind the tree (Rabipelado shot him) a poisoned dart that rebounded on his throat. rehariwe hii ke hi ha a ãyoriprou tehe pei re orãmisi hami e masi mãiã re nokamareiwei.

rebounded on his throat. nokamareiwei.

to put hands on something (sometimes with the intention of stealing it), to grab something quickly. yete.

tie up the hammock where it was before. amarra el chinchorro donde estaba antes.

tie up. amarra.

snake (unidentified). komomorema.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I pushed the point into the shaft and sat down by the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to introduce with force by pushing with the hand. tisuu.

on the face of the old woman they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. suwe ke the pata mamo kasi wãri oniprai ha yairoheni.

eyelid; edge of the eyes. fpe.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

small arrow made of bamboo or hardwood palm. masiki.

to scrape, to plane. shorereai.

to arch, to be arched; to be leaning backwards due to a load with a strap that is too short (the load rests on the kidneys instead of the buttocks). krehetheo.

(he/she/it) woke up, became aware. puhi hatukerayou.

to wake up, to become aware of the outside world, to start behaving (young child). hatukei.

he deceived the others, he told them lies. peeye ke nahe ta yaki, ya rãmi ta hu.

to deceive. ije.

no lo comas. a warihe.

no lo des and also it can be The word 'he' in Yanomami means 'to insist'. the hiyohe.

women, do not say that, do not insist on embarrassing us. maa, e naha pe kutihehe, suwe pe, yamare kiriapramai he prakehotihehe.

no. he.

let's go quickly to the river. rahara ke ki paa ha shoapariheni.

to go quickly to the river. shoapariheni.

headdress of the hekura, similar to the stars. watoshe shitikari.

to become silent, to cease (noise). waiprou.

to make war. yahatuayou.

the cassava plants fell off, detaching from the root. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

to fall off, detaching from the root. poruai.

wet guayuco pants irritate the skin of the thighs. wayuko here peni the pe waku misi hushiamai.

to cause a painful irritation of the skin. hushimararei.

the dog curled up. hiima a motorekema.

to coil up, curl up (as an animal sleeping). motorekema.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the surface of water, behind clouds (celestial body). ururou.

to fish by tying a line to a branch. fãsitha karoramai.

to fish. asitha.

shotgun pellets. fkopeta moku.

empty cartridge. fkopeta mo sisi.

shotgun, rifle. fkopeta.

now the waters (of the flood) are near. hei tehe the u re ahetore e.

near. ahetore.

the hekura started smiling. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

will he start smiling finally. pe kasi watea ke a ta kuhani.

to smile. watekei.

to deepen the interior of an object, to make a cavity deeper. koehekei.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (talking about the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

to relax, loosen, undo. hifo.

¿qué es lo que se quemó allá, en el lugar donde el suelo está cubierto (de hojas). kihi weti ke the rii yaoma the he re yohopiyei.

covered, burned. yaoma.

to have the gaze turned towards. yaipariyo.

to bend, to curve (multiple objects). hithoremai.

the great rock leaned slowly. opi totihiwe maki pata wekeai re kuaaheriiwei.

the earth crumbled (around) the trees and they leaned slowly. hiki hishiai kuaai ha kuikuni, hiki opisi wekeataroma (mit.

1. To lean, bend; to oscillate. 2. To slide and fall (long supported object, especially arrows). wekeai.

to hurry to retrace one. yapatakei.

to have shaken persistently (an object planted in the ground). hãwekerayou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco.). serimi.

we will make the birds smoke, little brother. kirithami pema pe makeprape, oãsi.

to place several objects on something, to place on a tray. makepraai.

he climbed back up and began the last part of his ascent. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

To be or get in the middle of a line of people moving, or in the middle part of a canoe. poushokuo.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

1. to settle, to decant, to form a deposit 2. to let settle, to let decant; to put a canoe at the bottom of the water. papehe.

a locative or directional form. ku-imi.

to flap the wings. prathetheai.

como yo no dormía me mandaron (a hacer algo). ya mio no mai ha, ware a shimama.

mandaron, enviaron. shimama.

we launched a cry and they did the same. yamaki rariprariyoma, kama pe ã mi wãri hetuwe.

the enemy warriors launched a cry. wayu pe rariprariyoma.

to launch a collective cry/clamor. rariprariyom.

sinuous stream. u shãkoko ushipiri.

sinuous stream. shãkoko.

rubber tree; Couma macrocarpa (Apocynaceae). kãnimãri ãhi.

fruit of this tree. kãnimãri ãshi.

rubber tree. kãnimari.

to flee, to take refuge in. proruru.

the cats were satiated. mishi pe petirariyoma.

they were filled/satiated. petirariyoma.

to put food in the mouth that is held in the palm of the hand, to catch an entire prey with the mouth (animal). wahahurei.

I will not go to look at your small banana plant anymore. kuratha si wai mii mai ke the.

to look at. mii.

to hurry to retrace one. yapatakei.

to be satiated. potehou.

to offer or present something to someone, to extend an object to give it to someone. totopei.

to hurry back on one. patakei.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear, to split. kre.

to invite a person one pretends to be friends with in order to kill them. nomohori.

the carrying strap stretches. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downwards, to become wide (a carrying strap). prayukuai.

enemy. hoheri.

to roll up in a spiral, to curl up. yapurai.

temporarily vacant dwelling or camp. mathokowe.

Baba had the habit of going to the river banks to cook his packages of caterpillars over the coals. aka wapiwei ke u ha iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

they turn over the packages that are roasting over the coals. pe hãro mi hapei re kupeiwehei.

package of food wrapped in leaves to be cooked over the coals. wapiwei.

your nostrils will exhale a pleasant smell again. wa hiyokaki ni kreteri hirakaa ha totihiparuni.

to insert a flexible fiber into the nose to force a sneeze. hiyokaki hishão.

to have the nostrils blocked. hiyokaki komi.

nostrils. hiyokaki.

sting. hiwehe.

the small child that they had taken grew. reiwehei, a patarayoma.

grew. patarayoma.

to pleat (locally). wãhiãi.

I was convinced that a snake was going to bite me and I walked with apprehension. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to walk with apprehension or worry. haruaprarou.

supernatural being, demon of the night. titiriwe.

to break a limb. yahekio.

to form breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). ãmiprou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). kasi wathe.

spider weaver (numerous species). haharamaema.

they are my arrow canes. kamiye ya asherekapi siki.

my arrow canes. asherekapi.

to pass from one slope to another. kopatama.

they (the hekura) have red cotton on their legs. pe mathaki matoyapi.

leg. matha.

arch yourself. a mi ta yãpreketaru.

arch yourself, bend upwards. yãpreketaru.

chirriar los dientes. eieimou.

to close. raai.

to put to toast or dry as quickly as possible. shirishiri.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to rise to the surface of the water (bubbles). poririai.

they made the leaves dry over the heat of a bonfire, when the leaves were dry, one of them brought them to the one working on the tree. yãã henaki shirikamahe, hena pe shiriki totihiwe tehe, aini henaki perakema.

to put several objects to dry over the fire. shirikiprai.

to crush an object by accidentally dropping something on it. yatikimakei.

he dragged his scrotum on the ground, covered his anus with it, and then quickly penetrated the woman. the posi he yohoporani, pitha hami the aruku pata ha shaiprarani the mo tititai yairayoma.

the testicles; the scrotum. aruku.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama (mit.

inflated, dilated, swollen (plural objects). shuweprou.

to untangle. kateherei.

the inflorescences of the pijiguaos hang in the void. rasha ãthe mi kayahapraw e.

hanging in the void. kayahapraw.

to be satisfied after taking revenge for bloodshed. puhi kãi hutetewe.

to be full, to be satiated. puhi hutete.

"Leave her here (and abandon her)", the yawari said. "eyeha re a wãri ta huhea hairihe", yawari pe kuma.

here, in this place (where the speaker is located). hairihe.

to fall off, become uprooted. si poru.

you can see clearly that it is hard/solid. a ma re hihui.

you can clearly see that it is hard/solid. hihui.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, to become bigger than (perfective form of the inchoative verb). morokorãyou.

one does not deny anything to one's father-in-law. pe shii the pe iha the pe shi imamou taomi.

his/her father-in-law, his/her mother. shii.

to stain or spot partially. hayapisiai.

to be reimbursed, to be restituted; to get something in return, a compensation; to get paid. reem-.

that the morning demons hurry up (lit. waikana theri pe shi ta hariprarukiri.

to hurry up, to do something quickly. hariprarukiri.

to place something on the ground near the lower part of the roof. prathei.

to be twisted at a single point. torokoprou.

stay calm, be quiet. mamikai pe ta kuiku.

slowly, silently, Centipede started crawling. opisi, mamikai, kumãrãroriwe a yonitou re perayoherima.

to stay calm, quiet, silent; to not create problems, threats or insults. mamikai.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise, notify. yimirãi.

pedos tienen siempre un olor (farts always have a smell). shiã ke pe ni ukukuo si ihehewe.

to smell something, to sniff, to sniff (once). ukukuo.

brave man. nosiyeriwe.

to reflect. puhi kuu kãi perio.

I cooked a casabe bread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

to cook on a metal plate placed over the coals (perfective aspect of the incompletive form). rãmiãrei.

to make move, to set to work, to produce waves or undulations. kiããmai.

towards the back, to sway. auy.

not. pahatea.

term. oprou.

scratched (someone) once. tikokorei.

to be dragged by the fall of an object. pakiai.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

to strangle. shiãrini.

show, teach. taamai.

to be isolated again. yawerai.

he was in his hammock and was swinging himself with his foot while whistling. the husi heã wãri kayerikayerimou yaioma.

tensing the muscles, bracing oneself on the feet and tensing the body to undertake an effort; swinging oneself by pushing with the foot while lying in a hammock. kayerikayerimou.

los pelos del pubis llenos de parásitos de la Mujer-tucán revolotean cerca de mí. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

revolotear, revoloteo. shuririope.

sentarse estirando las pier-. fmatha shaiprao.

leg. pier-.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to soften by crushing with the fingers; to crumble in the hand, to crush leaves when abandoning a path, to have luck during a search. hurukuai.

everyone left, they abandoned the communal dwelling. pe komi hua shoarayoma, pe no rii maprou re shoarayouwei.

the children disappeared immediately. ihiru pe no mraa re shoatareiwei.

to go away, leave, disappear, be absent. mr.

small earthen vessel. parãkana.

he is probably still there. a shoapiyei ke the.

he is probably still there. shoapiyei.

open space, clearing. yakre.

to be fat, big (living being). hutehai.

hallucinogen whose effect persists. wayu rape.

to get stuck in the mud (perfective). kawehou kukei.

to wait for daybreak to do something. harumarei.

to have this kinship relationship with someone, to address someone using this kinship term. aipemou.

container that. kahumou.

suwe pata pe ihirupi ke a himomai kupariyomahe (mit. suwe pata pe ihirupi ke a himomai kupariyomahe (mit. ): they invited the old woman's son to participate in a ceremonial dialogue (to make their request). ): ellos invitaron al hijo de la anciana a participar en un diálogo ceremonial (para formular el pedido de ellos).

to invite. himomai.

the food of the hekura makes you lose strength. hekura re pe nini wa uhutuai totihia.

to soften, to make soft or flexible. uhutu.

he had so much sadness that he quickly returned to the region (inhabited by his parents). yetu the urihi aheteai re korãyouwei, puhipuhipeni (mit.

to approach, to come near, to invite someone to live nearby. aheteai.

to be afraid. ãsikeãma.

to cover one's head with something and also it can be The word 'horoi' in Yanomami means 'white down'. he horoimou.

his throat is surrounded by white down, like that of the rahara monster. hawe rahara keki kahiki pata horoi krea.

to cover one. horoi.

to crack in several places. nashoprou.

to worsen (when a sick person is exposed to the sun for too long), to become hairy (human), to become tomentose (plant). shipei.

abscesses or boils. yuupiprou.

(myth) Oso hormiguero fell asleep with his head thrown back on an old reddish tree trunk. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

1. To become slightly reddish. 2. To cause red spots to appear on the skin (sun). 3. To be reddish.. si teãyã.

to pass the time. durkukei.

to start making something dense or thick. shikoprai.

he grabbed the ball of dye and quickly painted his chest. nara a ha hurihireni, pariki oni hirihirikema.

expression synonymous with the previous one. fhei ki re hirikope (o hei ki re hirikore).

to be painted by rubbing the body with dye. hirikou.

I got lost. ya mohorurayom a.

to get lost, to stray. oru.

Pájaro váquiro took a shortcut going directly through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to take a shortcut through the forest. aheanariwe.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

to start separating the two cotyledons of a momo fruit to remove the embryo (which is eaten separately). iprushiprai.

he is angry. hutukarami akasi.

to be angry. hutukarami.

as Mount Maiyo was gradually submerging, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to submerge food in water, to completely cover with water a food being cooked. he shototoamai.

to submerge gradually, to let vegetation overgrow. shototo.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

kohere. kohere.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially carved the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to carve or engrave circularly, but not encompassing the entire circumference, on a cylindrical or spherical object. eshehekei.

they came ashore, they gathered with us. pe hashirikei, pe warokei.

to come ashore, to reach dry land. hashirikei.

the Waika went to war (and one of them said) "now I will really kill him" (upriver dialect). waika pe wayu fa aruf erini: "fei tehe ya wãri prapou ta totihio" (habla de río arriba.

to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. wayu aruherii.

cloudy, foggy. ihiroithawe.

they pursued me in vain in this place, they tensed their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

they tensed their bows. iyohooperei.

to squat, to crouch. wahotou.

but they put the fish to roast on the embers. yahe pe waa ha ropataarini.

they put the fish to roast on the embers. ropataarini.

to reply immediately. nokaai.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to heal, to get better, to recover (health state). manahehe.

retorcer la cuerda de un arco haciéndola girar sobre el muslo con la palma de la mano (en el momento de la fabricación). hãto nahitha prikiprikiai.

twist the bowstring by rolling it over the thigh with the palm of the hand (during the manufacturing process). prikiprikiai.

he went upriver in a canoe until here, to harvest wild fruits. kanawa ke a ha the pe pehi kãi mi ha yãmoimani, the pe ni thaoma.

to harvest wild fruits. thaoma.

¡qué mentirosos son. kurahe re the pe wai horeheta.

expresses astonishment. horeheta.

in an instant, Lagarto cut in several pieces the beehive that he let fall, then he slid down along the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to slide quickly along a trunk (to go down). erorou.

to reject, push away and expel a person by pushing them forward. mãiãi: rechazar, apartar y echar a una persona empujándola hacia adelante de uno.

reject, push away. mãiãi.

to impregnate a woman, said in the same way. shipenam a i.

to become pregnant. shipena.

boulders that rise up next to each other. hothothowe.

to open. hape.

over there, downstream, there were two (people), and I suddenly noticed them. eyemi, koro ha, porakapi the kipi kuoma, ya mamo shatiprakema.

to suddenly catch sight of, to suddenly notice. shatiprakema.

we will go hunting paujies at night illuminating ourselves with torches. no yaipi nape yãikoheripe: iremos a cazar paujíes durante la noche iluminándonos con tizones.

to illuminate (something or someone, with a torch or making the fire flare up). pe yãikiãi: iluminar (algo o a alguien, con una antorcha o haciendo que el fuego llamee).

to illuminate. yãiki.

to recover consciousness. mi yaitha.

to recover consciousness after being under the influence of a strong hallucinogen; to free oneself after being possessed by a supernatural being; to become human. yaitha.

to break off branches. mãho.

arch yourself. a mi ta yãpreketaru.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãpreke.

he approached them completely. a ha tikukutoni, a ha hamorioni, the pe horiã ha hititirarini, the pe hoketamama.

to approach them completely. hoketamama.

Woodpecker clung to the curare vine and pecked it rapidly. mamokori ira ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni a tootoomoma.

to strike or peck rapidly and repeatedly. yetepraikuni.

1. To cook directly over the fire (without hanging it). 2. To replace a shoot in its place after having extracted the roots or tubers (ocumo or cassava). tirerai.

the flood waters came pushing the Waika people in front of it. motu ke u hai ha kuikuni, waika ke pe pararumai ha kuikuni (mit.

to start leading, guiding or pushing someone/something in front of oneself. pararuprai.

tree (unidentified). usihi.

we fished upstream from where the Karesisiwe River flows into (another river). karesisiwe u re papohori ha pemaki yuri kããma.

name of a river. Karesisiwe.

I was part of the group at the front. ya iheteaprarou nareoma.

to march at the head. ihetai.

to be lazy. wãkereai.

to make war. ohemayou.

to be sinuous, to possess numerous meanders (streams of water). shokekewe.

to improve (health condition). kuyeheai.

the fierce beast approached rapidly. yaro ke a pata re ikuikutakeiwei (mit.

to approach rapidly, to direct oneself swiftly towards. ikuikutakei.

when the plantains reached maturity he said: "go hunt animals for me". kuratha e pe hãmoprou tehe a wã hai shoaom a: "yaroye ke a ta thahe".

to reach maturity. hãmoprou.

during their escape the hekura left marks of their passage on the vines. hekura pe ruu tehe wãkowãko thotho rekekamahe.

(related form). rekeke.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially gnawed the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to be carving or chiseling in this manner several objects. eshehãmai.

to untie, loosen (the knot that attaches the bowstring to the bow). hãto nahi moroshi ikukuprou.

go, remove the bowstrings from your bows. pei, hãto ke nahipe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

bowstring, cord of the bow. moroshi.

to unfold, to smooth with the foot. kashishi.

they got up one after the other from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

to start to get up one after the other and leave the house together (group of people). weyoyotou.

to be decorated with a series of short parallel strokes, like the drawings on the body of a caterpillar kasha husi. oni rohaha foni kasha husiwe.

to decorate with a series of short parallel strokes, like the markings on the body of a caterpillar. husiwe.

we realized that the chigüires ate the banana plants. kuratha sipe ha kãyuri pe iyai no thar e s h i.

to eat. kãyuri.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). mi ãmo prou kasitamai.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe), to place something on the edge, to be on the edge (having been placed there or having gone there), to be apart, to be on the periphery, to be dispersed in the forest in various camps. kasiki-.

they say that you are an infallible shooter. wa nihite wãhã ha hirapoheni.

a sure shot, an infallible shooter. hirapoheni.

to feel headaches after walking a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe.

to vibrate, to experience small shakes; to sway. tirikai.

to lay eggs. ukosiprou.

Sorocuá advanced staggering, and then collapsed. kurekurethawe re e krei re kuaaheriiwei, a shea shoaparema.

to sway, rock, totter, lean forward and backward; to stagger, tilt, slant downward abruptly (often in a threatening manner). kuaaheriiw.

to break a banana or plantain stem with a rigid pointed object (bow or stick) in order to collect the bunch it bears. tihekiakei.

I was walking rapidly behind them, I did no more than run. ya re ropaa herayoheriiwei, pei ya shiro hi rereama.

quickly, rapidly. rápim.

to say. hosho.

to go upriver. pariki suhaha.

that has been put in a good position. the totihitakema.

to put oneself in a comfortable position, to position oneself well. totihitakema.

perfective. tamapariyo.

scratched (someone) once. tikokorei.

they had invited guests to a feast and saw them in a dream. the pe shoayou kuaai ha kuikuni, pe thapi ha thariheni.

dream, premonitory dream. thapi.

to make (something) splash once. hamishiai.

to tell someone to begin softening an object or to soften it locally. epeheamai.

to make splash (factitive). hamishi.

the ancestors who lived in other times (in different places) transformed (into animals). perihonowei the peni pe shi wãrihoma (mit.

the ancestors who lived in other times (in different places). perihonowei.

camino que sube. fyo mi nono ã.

camino que sube. fyo mi nono.

during the wayamou, to take over the initiative from someone else, to take the initiative in turn. wã koãmai.

it is moldy. mishi ruthe.

to be moldy. mishi ruthe.

my father and I stop when we reach the middle of the river. haye sho peishoki u ha yaheki hore upraa ayapariyo.

we tie the arrows together (in their middle part). shereka ke yama pe poushoku pata re thaamaperei.

middle, center. ayapariyo.

plant species. kuhãwe nathosi.

plant species. krããma nathoshi.

plant. nathosi.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to make war. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to shoot arrows at each other, to make war, to be at war. niyãyou.

the ground broke right at the place where the ugly man was squatting. wãritiwe the wãri re roowei ha a mashitha hetia re he wetirayouwei.

to break, crack, split in multiple places; to come to an end, terminate (a surface). wetirayou.

to look with the corner of the eye. ashetou.

they felt then a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to be worried about someone. haruhua.

I turn over the package in which fish are cooked. yuri ya hãro mi hatuai.

he looked at the turtle and turned it over several times. poshotomi pe mima, pe mi hatuatarama.

to turn over an object, to put it upside down. mi hatuai.

diarrhea. icos.

the woman was seated on the ground. a tirereoma.

to remain seated on the ground for a long time. tireretao.

to speak in a low voice for a moment, to speak in a low voice (after having spoken normally). wahatotou.

to be a little long. frapatiwe.

to let water evaporate by distraction from a cooking food. weheamai.

he was in his hammock and was swinging himself with his foot while whistling. the husi heã wãri kayerikayerimou yaioma.

to brace oneself, tense one. kayo.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani (mit.

to start shaking (something). rupukuprai.

gather the leaves, each one on their side, we will spread them out again (to hide our tracks). hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope.

he piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

to gather, to assemble, to pile up. yototokei.

it refers to the deceased wife of a man (lit. fshikãpi re thãrimionowei.

the lower part of the roof of a dwelling or shelter; the area behind a dwelling. fshikã.

sour, acidic. nashiwe.

to make the broth of cooked meat taste strongly of game meat. nashiprai.

to bend the edge of an instrument when hitting too hard a surface (generally good steel breaks, poor quality steel bends and twists). tishikimakei.

to line up. wirinaãi.

the rope of the canoe is not untied. kanawa a natha kusheami.

to untie, to undo (a knot). kusheami.

don't think you can hold me immobile by grabbing me around the waist. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to hold someone immobile by grabbing them around the waist. fãrokopouwe.

they pursued me in vain in this place, they were tensing their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

they pursued me in vain. poimamahe.

to crush something by hitting it with the palm of the hand, to crush an insect in that way. paiai.

I will make the provisional shelter (or the shapono) very carefully. yano ya toprakei.

I will carefully put the feathers on the arrow. shereka ya he toprapei.

to do carefully. topraai.

I will invite you. pe nakaaiwe.

to invite. nakaa.

to split it, he split one of its ends to make the mouth, and the wood by striking it against the ground. yahekiai, inc.

to break, to split. yahekiai.

se dice que el anciano de Horeape, ése que tiene la piel picada (de puntos negros), quiere venir a lanzarme (lit. horeape theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

a place name. Horeape.

to constitute several dispersed groups of intermingled people. nikereprawe.

to be hooked, to be hung (plural objects). rukekewe.

he gave everything, he ate everything. ya rii ha hãithoreni.

to give everything, to eat everything. hãithoreni.

to limp, to hobble. kayehe.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

pile up. apilaré.

I will not change my mind, I will invite you. mai ke the, pe nakaaiwe.

I will invite you. nakaaiwe.

buttocks of a child. oragas.

to put above, to raise up. yutehai.

to be lightly sugared. cateti.

when we had left the palm grove behind, we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to leave a place behind, go further than. parokuni.

to tell someone to tighten/narrow several objects. fmakosimamai.

to split, divide, separate a part from a whole. shererekã.

when Õmawe and Yoawe (the two demiurges) were still children, the disease demons did not yet exist. omawe ke kipi ihiruo tehe no wãri ke ki kuo parionomi.

maleficent supernatural beings. ihiruo.

to tie the legs of a hunted animal to the body (to carry it). wikokoãi.

to start tearing apart, to start shredding. rehihiprai.

to breathe regularly, to be alive. mishiãki hai.

to be out of breath, breathless. mishiãki pakukutou (cha.

breath, breathing. mishiãki.

hair, head hair. hethãnãu.

supernatural dog, domestic animal of the hekura. thãri.

to move through dense vegetation and not be visible. hithethou.

come little one (son-in-law), you will lick my fingers (after I have harvested honey). hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape (mit.

affectionate kinship term, used by parents-in-law (male or female) to address their son-in-law. horupe.

Prereimariwe followed (the scene) with his gaze. prereimariwe ke mamo wãri hutariyowei.

to direct one. hutariyowei.

to smoke (in form). wehero.

te aseguro que en todas las casas adonde los "Blancos" no han venido a inyectar, los Yãnomãmi se han muerto. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to begin to inject, to start injecting. hiweheprai.

you will make the banana burn. kuratha wa ishimarei.

to burn. quemar.

to be angry. oiposhokomi.

ant. kapa.

the demon of the night always sang in a plaintive manner in the place where it used to perch. titiri a re ropraanowei hami a shiro miã ikima (mit.

sang in a plaintive manner. ropraanowei.

(they) were one next to another. e naha re the he tipetewe.

to be one next to another (rounded objects). tipetewe.

(if I do that) I will get thorns stuck (in the flesh). ya misikipirariyo.

to get thorns stuck in the flesh. misikipirariyo.

hold firmly. a ta rohothoiku.

older brother, hold firmly for a moment. ãi a wãri ta rohothotaru.

to hold firmly for a while. rohothotou.

the people upriver speak without ceasing about us, I know it (lit. hei ora theri ke pe ã wai wayou kuyehewe ya yimika ma re kuuwei.

speak without ceasing. kuyehewe.

sobre un cerro, sobre una loma. fhehu a wai hami.

está situado a media altura sobre la montaña. hehu a shithema hami the kua.

el camino está en el costado de la montaña. hehu a shithema hami yo kua.

hill, slope, mountain. fhehu.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to crush, to crumble with the fingers. hurukama.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

to separate the two cotyledons of a momo fruit to remove the embryo (which is eaten separately). iprushiai.

when the apparitions enter the empty house, they revive the fire by pushing the burning logs towards the center (to warm themselves). yãno proke hami pore pe hai tehe koa wake popohoai.

to push the burning logs towards the center of the fire to revive it (perfective aspect of the durative form). popohoakei.

when all of them had revived, they got up quickly. the pe horiã ha hititiraruni, the pe hoketama (mit.

to heal, to revive (after a shamanic healing). horiprarei.

to melt, reduce, diminish, become thin (durative). kuwetaaherii.

(sound of striking wood). krehe.

sound produced by a wooden object when struck. krehe.

to become acidic, to become sour. nashiai.

to make an edible (non-bitter) poisonous fruit by cooking it for a long time or soaking it in running water. mihitamai.

to mix (people, objects). nikerekei.

(a bird) scratches the ground with its feet. shapono hami kasuelo.

to scratch the ground with the feet (e.g. a bird scratching for food). kasuelo.

to smear something. he horoprai.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

to smear or apply something. horo.

to make love (jokingly). hishãhishãmou.

to make love (said by a man). wa*mou.

full. heraho.

they shot numerous arrows and it made a thohuthohumou sound as they fell. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

it made a thohuthohumou sound. niyaakiheni.

batara mayor. Taraba.

the child likes to be carried. ihiru a yehio.

to carry on one. yehi.

to camp several days in the jungle to collect leaves for a roof. fhenaki wai.

Apply the medicine on the wounds. Posa horã hesi sobre las heridas.

to apply. posa.

the children were climbing the trees (with rings placed around their ankles). hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei.

in turn, Woodpecker climbed right away. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit.

to climb by successive elongations of the body (like certain inchworms). torerou.

the bats ate all the cambures during the night (the speaker discovers that his plants are destroyed). hewe peni raparimi ki mi wathea harurema sihei.

they ate. harurema.

onomatopoeia, noise produced when blowing hallucinogenic through a tube into someone. shoi!.

to be angry. shararamo.

I just stole banana plants. ru thomiã re ayarekirihe.

banana plants. thomiã.

to have walked describing a curve. shokerayou.

to cause to spin around, to cause to pivot around an axis, to cause to rotate. shimoremomai.

to finish doing something. poteteprou.

to have become dusty. hekrãpirariyo.

bad shooter. nimri.

if no preparan un ovillo de algodón no obtendrán una olla grande. ana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

if. ana.

to sneeze. esikamo.

to have a part of the face painted with dots. tipikia.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe.

supernatural beings associated with the glowworm. amakurithaw.

he wants to wait for the morã fruits to ripen before picking them. morã mape niya ushiamai.

to wait for a fruit to ripen before harvesting it. ushirayou.

to play at covering oneself with mud. ãhiãmayorayou.

resist the penetration of a sharp or cutting instrument. touku.

stomach pains make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. turekamai.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yãnomãmi have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to pierce, to perforate, to inject. hiwehai.

he moved away a little in the forest. urihi hami the re payekepayekekeiwei.

to move away a little, to travel a certain distance. payekepayekekeiwei.

ocelot. yaomi.

make them flexible. wa e the ki ha uhutitiprarini.

make flexible. uhutitiprarini.

to let rot. taremai.

to divide a tobacco leaf in two following the central vein. pee nahe repokosi.

to divide, to split, to break apart. kosi.

as the woman yawari clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to cloud one. yãwãriyomani.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to rise to the surface of the water (bubbles). porirai.

a pole or solid bar placed between trees to allow passing from one to the other. coyetu.

to paint round spots on the body by rolling a ball of onoto (a red dye) mixed with saliva on the skin. hikikãi.

they made a crunching noise as they walked on the dead leaves. the pe shurushurupraroma.

to make a crunching noise while walking on dead leaves or dense vegetation. shurushurupraroma.

"Look at what they are doing. "e naha pe kuaai ta tharei. ". ".

Look at what they are doing!. tharei!.

to be afraid. mothethe.

to do something quickly. ãteãtem.

yãmoni. yãmoni.

the monster rahara swallowed the Waika messenger of the feast. rahara ke kini waika ke the teshomopi re suhareiwei (mit.

to swallow, to devour. suhareiwei.

squat in a line one next to the other on the platform. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to squat in a line one next to the other. rãyokei.

border. yaipe.

to sway persistently. hãwekou.

to make the dye, to turn green. ushuhuai.

to remove a tooth from the jaw (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetirarei.

to live without ceasing in different places. ononoomi.

to bend, twist the edge of a tool by hitting against an object that is too hard. koheãmai.

when you see the enemy warriors you will feel seized by terror. wayu wa pe taprai tehe wa ãmoku keprariyo.

feeling of horror, of terror; being stunned. keprariyo.

the wariomi koheshi spiders move around. wariomi koheshiki erekou.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the (enemy) shamans, to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

spider. koheshi.

several concave marks on multiple objects. wãhihirariyo.

I am sleeping. ya mioherii.

the water level is dropping. u resiaherii.

deadly substances, poisons. heri.

to be impassive, stoic (in relation to pain, danger); not to show sadness during mourning. puhi rohothoo.

to overcome fear, resist pain. rohothoai.

to go to live in the forest. ãmoprou.

to make love noisily (said by a man). sokãsokãmo.

the himo wasps became possessed by the ãiãmo demon. himo ke ki ãiãmoprou ha kuparuni (cha.

to be possessed by the ãiãmo demon and become fierce like it. ãiãmoprou.

sugar. asuka.

The bark of the ayukuma tree peels off easily. ayukuma a si poshowe.

1. To have several blisters. 2. To peel off easily (skin, bark).. oshowe.

small and voracious fish adorned with longitudinal bands; lives in mountain streams. sharu.

we went down to the River of Rains and went back upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

went back upstream. remontamos.

to have hair growing back after a tonsure. yootho.

to fall asleep. puhi mramai.

there are lightning flashes. the mi yãmimou.

to occur repeatedly (lightning). yãmimou.

to be angry. hoteri.

to remain seated in a hammock for a long time. tipetaai.

the house of the men was wide. yãnomãmi the pe hãtopi nahi praukuoma.

to be vast, extensive; to be wide. praukuoma.

that I cover my head with that. ya e he ta yohotao totihio she.

to cover one. yohotao.

to breathe on the surface of the water (a fish). koãriyo.

1. paruri hesikaki yãpou.

neck skin and crest of the curassow bird; bracelet made from them. paruriye.

to have become extensive, to have expanded. praukurayou.

diarrhea. icos.

he hung the ripe plantains. kuratha ke ki wake re yaumakeiwei.

to hang, to suspend. yauamai.

(myth): Woman-Flat-Belly was completely flat. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

to level, flatten. resisiai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). makurutami.

to be thin (due to illness). hayapisi.

supernatural being, demon of the night. titiriwe.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially carved the shrub trunk. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to partially carve or chisel. eshehemakema.

chancleta; Agenciosus inermis (Auchenipteridae). mokashito.

él apoyó el palmito de la palma yagua a lo largo del árbol. hii ke hi ha yei ke ãmo hiririmakema.

mantener un objeto apoyado. hiriripou.

to make a noise, to crackle. krãrikrãri.

to be below, to be at the foot of. pehithea.

antonym. kirithami.

he got up and approached a masi vine, pulling it. a ha uprataruni, masi a ikokorema.

to approach, to get close. ikokorema.

dusty, covered in dust. hekrãpi.

to take a piece, a part, to offer it. ayakosiakei.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

formed a deposit. papeheoma.

it is no doubt because of those constant itches that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

reason, cause, motive. siye.

sparse, thin (plants, hair); said when the tubers of a yam plant are not abundant. mashishipi: poco espeso, ralo (plantas, cabellos); se dice cuando los tubérculos de una planta de ñame son poco abundantes.

sparse, thin. mashishipi.

to be completely hidden behind or underneath something (plural objects). he shãhoprawe.

to be imperfectly hidden behind or underneath something. shãhoã.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to have a bruise (perfective causative). hãepotopimararei.

lower level of the cosmos, the fifth. hetu misi suwe pata: nivel inferior del cosmos, el quinto. It is a desolate world, corroded by putrefaction. Es un mundo desolado, corroído por la putrefacción. Gigantic worms (shiromo namo) cast excrements as high as hills upon it. Gusanos gigantescos (shiromo namo) echan sobre él excrementos altos como colinas.

lower level of the cosmos. hetu misi suwe pata.

they paint their bodies and put white down on their heads. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to be putting white down on one. horoimamou.

collective dwelling (shapono) or other camp made up of individual temporary shelters. yahi: vivienda colectiva (shapono) o tra campamento integrado por refugios provisorios individuales.

collective dwelling, camp. yahi.

to be completely folded, to be folded several times. shãkoma no.

to be completely folded, to be folded several times. shãkoma.

small bird (unidentified). shoãkãmi.

to be completely visible. waehewe.

fish, sardine. Triportheus.

that's how the pijiguaos are. kinaha rasha ke ki k u w e.

Thus, like that, like this. kinaha.

only the yawari possess the bamboo (for making arrows), which grows in dry places. yawari peni rihu pe u nohi thapou kuporahei, weheti ha u kuami (cha.

dry, place where the ground was not flooded. wehetiwe.

to become completely visible (after having been hidden behind something). waeheprou.

his father has given it to him. pe hiini a hipekema.

the father of Tucán came to take Kasima as his wife. mayepirithaweni pe hiini kasimi a tea mi parema (mit.

his father, his older male relative in a direct line. hiini.

to become hairy. koiãi.

to sharpen the point of something. namo hiroro-.

he is always wandering around the house (insulting). fa huu wãritiwe keekeeapraroti.

to move about raising and lowering the tail (as certain birds do). keekeeaprarou.

(he) asked Puerco espín. hoperiwe iha e the wãrima.

designates a hekura or a mythical ancestor. -riwe.

yo lo buscaré circundando (el sitio). hei re ya the taeai ãyokãi totihio kuperei.

to circle around, to go around. ikimoi.

to be sick. kutu.

According to mythology, where a story opposes it to bees (which are associated with fire), the opossum represents stench, ugliness and putrefaction; it is at the origin of sorcery and the use of deadly magical plants; from its blood comes the diversity of colors of bird plumage, that is, zoological variety. Según la mitología, donde un relato lo opone a las abejas (que se asocian con el fuego), el rabipelado representa el hedor, la fealdad y la putrefacción; está en el origen de la hechicería y de la utilización de plantas mágicas mortíferas; de su sangre proviene la diversidad de colores del plumaje de las aves, es decir, la variedad zoológica.

rabipelado (opossum). aware.

he remained seated until dawn in his hammock hung between two branches. peki puuo tehe a tikeo he haruma.

to be installed or situated. puuo.

to be in good health again. temiã.

to let an object get wet from the rain. pathemai.

the sipara tree was not big, it had a liana wrapped around it. sipara kuwetawe kohi wai kuoma ma kui, hei kohi pe ha thoo thotho yãyokooma.

to roll up, to wrap around. yãyoko.

they put the peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke/cure incompletely (e.g. meat or fish). weheroweheroa.

at the moment he turned his back, Rabipelado shot him with a blowgun dart with deadly substances. a humapi reprou tehe, protho.

1. (onom.) the sound made by a blowgun when blowing to launch a projectile or harmful substances at someone. 2. (verb transitive) to launch harmful substances by blowing through a blowgun. protho.

to hide an object behind another, to disguise, to conceal by interposing something. shãhokei.

to extend horizontally; to extend a liana from one bank to another of a stream (in order to cross it, holding onto it). kareremai.

object that can be. watikamou.

ellos (los hekura) vuelven a coger el can-. ãmoã a koãi re kopohe ye.

to take back, to recover. kopohe.

to be too high (wall of an object), to become concave on the outside. wapokoray.

He was carrying the package on his back. cargaba el paquete sobre la espalda.

to carry on the back. reke.

the hekura broke into a smile. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

to smile briefly, to break into a smile. watetou.

upper part, surface. heaka.

I detach several strips of bark from the yãri natha shrub. yãri ya natha ikekai.

to lift, remove (to see, to grab): to detach a strip of bark by lifting it with the fingers, to open a door slightly to look, to partially lift or uncover an object (to see what it covers), to remove a hand of cambures from the bunch by exerting pressure from top to bottom. ikekerayou.

to make love. wãekewãekemou.

the Yanomami always put on a sullen expression (upriver speech). yãnoãmi pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

to put on a serious or hateful expression, to adopt an angry look. tikrohoamai.

he devoured his brain entirely. pe the he yoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

to devour entirely, to consume completely. haikiprarema.

people of the lowlands. koro*.

to have caused to be damaged or crushed (extremity of a long object). thekehemakei.

to make a little fat. preãkãmarei.

the Yanomami man arrived home carrying the woman on his back. yãnomãmi ke the suwe ha yehireherini a kãi kopema.

he carried her on his back. yehireherini.

just when I was fleeing, my bow got caught in the vegetation, and I pulled it several times to free it. ya tokuu tehe hãto nahi rukekema, hãto re ya nahi ikokama.

I pulled several times. ikokama.

to make a circular motion in the water; to clean a container by making a circular motion with the hand in the water, to wash a cloth by making that motion; to agitate the water in a circular motion with the foot to make fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yapore.

I will transport a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

I will transport. totihikei.

(example sentence fragment). a ruruaprarai ha kutaruni, pe wai puhio ke yaro, he re mãrokoshi.

to shave someone. mãrokoshiai.

puesto que en el camino él quería sembrar una caña para hacer flechas, partió un pedazo corto y cuando pasó por la cima de la montaña lo enterró oblicuamente. shereka ke ha niya ha tiaherini, horotowe ke a ha keprarini, hehu pororo ha a hirerekeherima.

to plant (a single plant). tiaherini.

Murciélago fue a pegarse (a lo largo de un tronco de árbol). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

Murciélago fue a pegarse (a lo largo de un tronco de árbol). sutiketayowei.

estoy seguro de que algunos anduvieron contando chismes. ai the pe wanomorayoma, e naha ke ya puhi kãi peritou.

andar contando chismes. wanomorayoma.

walk in a long line (in silence). hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihii.

to become hard like leather, to become deformed (by negligence). prithothai.

we advance towards you, a light ãmoamo plant inserted in the hole of our lower lip. yamaki husi ka no ãmoãmopi hena karei ta kuikiyo (cha.

a light plant. ãmoamo.

being curved or bent up (for a normally flat object). yotataai.

being curved or bent up (for a normally flat object). yotataai.

they became amahiri immediately. amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

evil spirits that cause disease. amaﬁri.

causes the eyeball to become red. acom.

causes the eyeball to become red. acom-.

we, all of us. kamiye pemamiye peheki.

we, us (inclusive). pemamiye.

to damage the edge of a tool in several places by striking it against a hard object. yakekamai.

I don't believe at all that you will stop wanting to eat meat, that's why I object (to that gift). wamaki naiki mraaV.

to object, to disagree, to oppose (something said, an opinion, a decision); to refuse (to give something). wãreke.

(related word). shieye.

edible fruit of the wakata hi tree. Simwakata.

he climbed again and initiated the last part of his ascent [peshekuprou, term. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma: volvió a trepar e inició la última parte de su ascenso [peshekuprou, term. ]. ].

initiated the last part of his ascent. peshekuprou.

in the center (of the fabric), there where it is dense, the Spider-spirit was crouched. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

to become dense, thick, dense (in the center of something). sutapariyo.

the termites will hollow out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororoprarei.

termites will hollow out. shipeni.

the konakona ants did not delay in climbing. konakona yetu e the pe wãri torereapraroma.

to climb. torereapraroma.

to have preserved revenge. puhi kãi riyehe.

he traced a sinuous line (on his forehead) and immediately set out for the shapono. the mi hore ha tikekeikuni yetu the wãri ha ikutaikuni, shapono hami.

to trace a sinuous line (on the forehead). tikekeikuni.

a type of vine (unidentified plant) whose bitter roots are sometimes eaten cooked over coals. koapi ãshithoku.

vine, climbing plant. shithoku.

brother-in-law, represent things clearly, when you achieve it, manifest your anger. shoriwe a puhi ta wararaparu, wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

to recall clearly, to represent clearly a distant event. wararai.

the blue body of Yãmonãmãriwe did not take long to swell. yãmonãmãriwe yetu ke a pata hãepotopi hããi ha kuparuni.

to swell, to inflate, to dilate. hããprou.

when one feels forced to lie down (due to the effect of hallucinogens), the posts that support the roof start to sway. the pe peritamai tehe, hãto ke nahi mohe pe hotehotemou.

to oscillate or sway due to the effect of wind; to have the impression that objects are swaying when one is under the effect of a hallucinogen. peritamai.

bejuco masimasi. ãhuku.

to be hungry. hutumi.

to make angry, to play tricks. hoashimou.

He provoked the wind to blow. pei maki no yaripi ma rororomou.

The Waika went to war. waika pe wayu fa aruf erini.

to provoke, irritate, bother; to scream in pain; to travel collectively as shamans to attack enemies; to prepare a substance to make it effective; to give birth with pain (believed to make the child brave). wayu.

to pluck a handful of feathers; to singe the hair of an animal before gutting it. hukukurei.

to become hazy/misty. ukosiãi.

the gallineta (bird) took flight and the spirits went away. hãshimori a ha yepraruni porepore pe kooprou ha kuparuni.

to fly away, to take flight. yepraruni.

to have the face painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakirakei.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to scratch, to claw, to rake with nails/claws. hukeke.

a huge anaconda was rising on his back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei.

lower back, lumbar muscles. mapuu.

to provoke the healing of someone. yãnikipramai.

comerán carne (lit. wamaki yaropi wãri krothakrothamope.

borbotones. krothakrothamope.

to make something go beyond, to let something go beyond. toreheamai.

bamboo arrowhead (terminal form). wahotoprou.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to wage war. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to shoot arrows at each other, to wage war, to be at war. niyãyou.

quiver cover, usually an animal skin. fthora a ka he.

to kill a man (ceremonial dialogue) (lit. fthora kusheai.

to put a blowgun in one's mouth (to blow harmful substances at someone). fthorapi weiai.

quiver. thora.

you have made a slip of the tongue. wa aka tihekia re yaipe.

to habitually make mistakes when speaking. tihekiwe.

go quickly to start pulling/plucking the roof leaves (to prevent the fire from spreading). kiha yaa ke mishiki ukukuprai ta hairo.

to start pulling/plucking (something) towards oneself with the fingers. ukukuprai.

to leave to deposit, to leave to decant. papeheamai.

thanks to the felid's dye, our body paintings emanate a glow that constantly sketches a smile when we approach you (say the hekura). iraira noupeni yamaki oni sh kasi watewatemou no re kirioimi.

body painting, body decoration. noupeni.

fish (unidentified). tootoomi.

"you have had a slip of the tongue", this is the news that I will truly spread. "wa aka tihekia re yaipe", a wãno wã thaprai yaia kutaeni.

to make a slip of the tongue, to have a lapse. tihekia.

(synonym for pee nahe yeri). tiri.

to eviscerate. porakapi.

they appeared; one and the other were big. the kipi wawet theiai.

to slide and fall on one. roprao.

Honey produced by the wakopo na bee. wakopo na: bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). It nests in tree hollows; these bees are so aggressive that the honey is not harvested.. wakopo.

to make (something) too short, to fail to make (something) thin and sharp. manakoromai.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was shaken by where the others passed. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

the foliage was shaken by someone passing through. hishihishipraroperei.

The váquiro bird cut through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to cut through the jungle, to take a shortcut through the jungle. tiherirayoherima.

he descended again (along the tree trunk). the ithoa theri ha kothoherini.

sit (at the foot of the tree, the speaker is perched on it). a ta rotho.

to descend, to go down. kothoherini.

to sharpen a bamboo point. hiroro.

he who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and without waiting deflowered her. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei (mit.

to have the leg swelling. fmatha shekekeai, inc.

leg, hind leg. waiweini.

while Jaguar climbed higher up the tree, his arms could less and less encircle the trunk (which became thicker and thicker). irariwe ke pokoku suriroherima (mit.

to climb a tree trunk that cannot be fully encircled by the arms, using a vine wrapped around the ankles. suriroherima.

to tremble, vibrate superficially (like a gelatinous material when impacted or shaken laterally), to perform a gentle oscillating or vibrating motion (like a spider web trembling in the wind). riiriimou.

unfortunately they were engaged in ritual wrestling in the middle of the central plaza. the pe yãimou mi ãmo re tikooherinowe.

they were engaged in ritual wrestling. tikooherinowe.

to be passing, distancing oneself. thapi heimai.

to leave something in a place permanently. thapi heipou.

to pass, leave behind, go beyond a certain limit; to leave behind, distance oneself; to leave someone in a place to go to another, abandon on the way. heimai.

mythological ancestor of the Yanomami. oAntepasado.

noise, signal that precedes the return of the hunters. fheniyomi pe heã.

an extended hunting expedition; a hunter who goes camping for several days in the forest carrying food with him, to hunt animals, which he will bring back to the dwelling after having smoked them in the camp. heniyomi.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma.

very, much. ãmonãmãriyoma.

they climbed (the mountain) and, while climbing, Kasima felt vertigo. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a V.

to feel dizzy or vertigo. kirihotayoma.

bent in an arc like a raque-. raque-.

by the river the path deviated. poko u ha yo tiwaroma.

to deviate, to go around. tiwaroma.

a tree fell on the path. hiini yo shea.

to fall (said of a tree). shea.

to start to turn an object 180 degrees; to start to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemiprai.

forest that has not been inhabited. e naha ke pe ã shodo, selva que no está habitada.

1. to not have been touched yet; 2. to be the first to go to a place. shoma.

renunciar a un ataque, renunciar a querer matar a alguien. nape kuyeagresión.

aggression. kuyeagresión.

He arrived at his house and immediately stuck his machete (in a post of the dwelling, to store it that way). kama hãtopi nahi re kuawei hami a kokema, e siparapi shatia shoamapeheroma.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. kihami ya koketayoma pei maki hami ya peria nareatayoa (mit.

to arrive, to reach, to come back. kokema.

to grab (a person) with all one. huweherarei.

I'm going to get a pot in exchange for arrows (lit. hapokaye ke ya yehiai.

to get, obtain, acquire. yehiai.

they approached to see. the mii mi re ikukeiwei.

what are you going to do. weti ke wa the thai mi huu.

where is he going. weti hami a huu.

to go somewhere with a specific purpose. huu.

To cause (through negligence) the softening of a cassava bread. wihihi.

to go beyond, to surpass (in height), to become bigger than. paroprou.

to remove a chigger (nigua) using a sharp object (needle or thorn). fhihu na washai.

to remove a chigger (nigua) using a sharp object (needle or thorn). fhihu.

to have become weak, to have lost vitality. yakarokorayou.

to kill a male person. frahaka hãwete.

put bamboo arrowheads on your arrows. rahaka ke a ta hiimahe.

to aim an arrow with a bamboo arrowhead at someone. frahaka puhurai.

bamboo arrowhead. frahaka.

liquid dyes. nouki.

fithothou, plural subjects: lehapoka a ithãã: the pot is on the ground. fithothou , pl.

pot. olla.

They say you are an infallible shooter and they expect your intervention. wa nihite wãhã ha hirapoheni, wa puhurai kupiyehei.

1. To count on someone. puhurai.

to bruise (plural objects), perfective aspect. wãokorariyo.

food that is scraped with the teeth. wãhehãmou.

to be about to fall off or detach. ihehou.

to cause someone's healing. yãnikipramai (cha.

to do something without hurry. yãnikãi.

(see related forms). shokatama.

He finished carrying a load. i una carga pashokoprou.

to finish carrying a load. pashokoprou.

to shorten. onoho.

they will give you an arrowhead. wa ãtãri ãhi prapehe.

to fix, tie firmly. ãteteãi.

1. large quantity of food. 2. Defend oneself efficiently, resist with courage. wãrou.

they do not fear (lit. fnosi ahihi.

to pursue, to follow. fnosi.

Millipede returned on its tracks. kumã yonii mi ha paoimani (mit.

manner of moving of millipedes; to crawl towards prey (a feline). yoni.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit. keshetou.

to have the penis hanging, untied from its cord (contrary to good manners in public). reio.

they removed the perforated body of the man (= they removed from the belly of the monster rahara the body of the man pierced with spears). yãnomãmi ke the tirosha no ukeremahe.

to pierce, perforate (once). tiroshoai.

you have avenged your relative (by killing a person who belongs to the same community as the killer). e naha re a hiima kuwe wama a koã waikirema.

to avenge a dead relative by killing a member of the killer. waikirema.

(he/she) speaks upriver. shiporokoma sitho.

to speak. hapa.

to come apart, to become uneven. yokaha.

they break easily. se rompen fácilmente.

easily. fácilmente.

you will make love many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already made love. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

to make love. wamo.

to be afraid. haikiami.

to uncover, reveal (that which is hidden or masked); to remove the bark from cotton, to part the hair to look for lice; to turn the pages of a book (neol.). hapresheai.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have done anything to you, they would have simply blown poisoned darts at you (with a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to repeatedly blow poisonous substances through a blowgun at someone. prothoprothomorayou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). yãpimowe.

to deform. deformarse.

(he) then transformed into a gray heron (lit. pasho re e si kuprou piyerayoma (mit. 'then he flew away as a gray heron'). ).

it flew away, it transformed. yerayoma.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). huore.

a sharp instrument made of poor quality steel whose edge bends each time it hits a slightly hard object. pruekou.

to have a dull, bent or damaged edge (for a sharp instrument like a knife or axe). prueke.

we were close to the goal when we regrouped on a rocky hill. yamaki ahetou tehe pei maki ha yamaki hirakema.

to be gathered, to be grouped together. hirakema.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

sharpens. thao.

madre, voy a tumbar un árbol apia, he construido un andamiaje (alrededor, para montarme encima). nape, apia ke ya hi tiyeherayou, apia ke ya hi mathakari thakei kuroi.

perforar, asestar, enterrar, fijar, pinchar, arponear, dar una cuchillada, golpear con una lanza. tiweheai.

the vine creaks under the weight of the heavy stone. maa ke ma pata hute ha thotho krininimou.

prolonged creaking sound produced by an object under strong mechanical pressure (traction or crushing). krininimou.

I scratch myself (once) with the nails and also it can be The word 'weti' in Yanomami means 'to carry'. ya tikokoo.

to scratch. weti.

to be about to cover one. horoipramoray.

abscesses. yuuwe.

when I was young I used to offer many objects (= I was generous). matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

I used to offer. totihioma.

to return on one. hetuprou.

to have been entirely cut into pieces. hãsinã.

to sleep or live in a hammock hung close to the ground. yatotokei.

I'm feeling better now, my health continues improving little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to improve after an illness; to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). hereherayou.

to receive a part. hakaropei.

look at me. a mi ta yaitaru.

to turn one. atha.

to solidify. solidi-.

(myth): Woman-Flat-Stomach lies on her back. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

to level, flatten. resisai.

butterflies (generic term for diurnal butterflies). uwãuwãmi.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

made several trips. yehiaprakiriomahe.

it is on the ground, on the shore. parau kasi hami the praa kupoi.

(epistemic modality). -poi.

to predict that. nihita.

maleficent supernatural being, cannibal, devours the pei mi ãmo that shamans deliver to it. watupariwe.

to place a limit on a surface, to limit. tirorokei.

arrugó hojas entre las manos y desnudó el suelo con el pie. esroshitaakini.

colony of seje palms. haprua mahiki.

to stretch, to extend. shai.

the rain erased the animal tracks. maani yaro pe mãyo pakokai.

to purify oneself, to disappear, to dissolve (under the action of water). pakokai.

to gather, to assemble. thouhu.

to place in a hammock (an object, a person). periamai.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). shuu.

to tremble for a moment. rayukurayou.

as I am accustomed to touching women, I intend to lie next to one to fondle her. suwe ya pe hupetarai ha, ya imiki niya yakao.

to touch women. hupetarai.

to hang. he hatete.

when they were close, they gathered to bathe. pe oweai tehe pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma.

were close. oweai.

ya reconocí la planta de los y a w a r i. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena no ihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a no ihipia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo no ihipia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. ihipia.

they went hunting (this morning). pe rãmi ayou ke a kuroi.

to go. ayou.

to mix two powders in that way. tikururei.

to mix, put together different objects or substances, mix different hallucinogens, mix beads of different colors. koyokokei.

to have sinusoidal lines, made with the nails on a colored background, painted on the chest. tikekeo.

to rub the penis on the vulva without penetration. tiketike.

to break a clump of cambur or plantain with a pointed and rigid object (bow or stick) in order to collect the bunch it carries. tihekimai.

to have slit partially and emptied multiple objects. ekokorarei.

He/it launched blowing (the deadly substance), and he fell immediately. Horonami lanzó soplando (la susde hacernos huir).

he/it launched blowing (the deadly substance). horonami.

(mit. poo ke hetho ha pee nahe makepoma.

tobacco. fpee.

to place vertically, to put vertical. yororãmai.

(he/she/it) takes a shortcut. he tiheri.

to take a shortcut. tiheriai.

He was behaving like a 'White' person (during a ceremonial discourse). Comtaei mi ha hutaaruheriini.

to behave like a . hutaaruheriini.

the shawakurimi fruits are edible. shawakurimi pe wamou.

edible fruit of the shawakurimi tree. shawakurimi.

defensive palisade around a dwelling or camp. ãrãnãmorayou.

defensive palisade around a dwelling or camp to protect against enemies. ãrãnãmorayou.

to keep the bowstring at the heel of an arrow. maketamai.

to hang low, to hang with a long rope. preyukuprou.

to doze, to nap. tharehe.

they are always pointing their guns at us: let them shoot then, it doesn't matter. kopeta a shiro hore puhuraihe ha, niyaai poohe.

it doesn. niyaai.

his wife was underneath, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

to place an object underneath or at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pehitheai.

at the moment when the jaguar was about to jump, he hit it with all his might. ira a mori niyão tehe ikãri a shei shoaoma.

when the fire is burning well, you will jump into it, you will roast for a while, and then you will get fat. pe wake pata parao totihio tehe, wa re niyaprapeiwei, iha wa yoriyorimotima, wa prerayou.

to let oneself fall on, to jump on; to jump over something. niyã.

to start floating. pokeprou.

they made love (perfective). wamorayou.

the little birds died. yarariyoma.

rotten (plural object). tarerariyo.

to be afraid. akanasimi.

to keep together various objects. kokãpou.

the knot of the bowstring slid along its anchor point (and came undone). pe nahitha moroshi ikukuprariyoma.

to slide a knot along its anchor point, or an object along its support. ikukuprai.

to glue, to stick (two objects). sutiprai.

to cover oneself with one. yahoai.

weyape (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue): the fish stays in the water until the evening (= all day). weyape (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

until the evening (= all day). weyape.

what's happening. eshi ke te.

what?. te?.

they are people of the Mahekoto community who did it, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to gather among related people (brothers and/or parallel cousins), among members of the same community. shiroprou.

to keep fixed. mamoku royokãi.

to keep fixed. royoko.

to express oneself fluently during a ceremonial dialogue, to be eloquent. kahirao.

to become frayed or unraveled. thauweshiprou.

I heard you. pe ã hirioma.

I heard you. hirioma.

then I tensed the string of my bow. hãto ya nahitha si potehea shoamakema.

to tense the string of a bow. potehea.

to feel disappointment (after a refusal). peprou.

todos se ensucian el rostro. pe mi shamihou.

¿en qué dirección partieron. weti hami ke pe mi kuprariyoherii kuhe.

face, visage. shamihou.

the váquiros escaped immediately, making Sherekanawe accompany them. ware ke ki tokua shoarayoma, sherekanawe a rurureherima.

making someone accompany during a journey. rurureherima.

to dent or deform in multiple places (perfective aspect, plural object). wãukuãmakei.

to take something out of someone. yahayerei.

the fish that swarm in large numbers (= the fish that swim in large numbers in the river). hei ki re shurirorati.

to flutter, to be stirred up or agitated by the wind, to swirl around; to swarm in large numbers. shurirai.

it bent strongly. mi pehuai.

to bend strongly, to fold to the breaking point (of an object); to arch, to bend strongly under weight. pehu.

lentamente Danta pasó (del árbol donde estaba encaramada) a un yagrumo. kahu ke usi ha shama ke a pata opi re piyekeiwei (mit.

la tortuga pasó rápidamente (del suelo en donde se encontraba) a la pasarela (par atravesar el curso de agua). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass or have passed from one support to another, what habitually passes from one place to another. yeiku.

arrange the logs in a star shape around the fire. koã ãshoku titete.

arrange in star shape. titete.

corn grains, corn cob. yono moku.

Bachaco was the owner of the corn. koyeriweni yono ke mo rii tama (mit.

on the way back we will accompany the wapu fruit with shosho almonds. pemaki koo tehe wapu ke a ha shosho pema mo teﬁape (habla de río arriba.

grain, seed, pit, almond, tuber; fruit with shell. yono.

if he saw someone committing incest, he would not say: "look what they are doing. hei nashomi yãnomãmi ya the wãri tararema ma kui, "e naha pe kuaai ta tharei. ", he would act as if nothing happened. ", ya kuu mai, ya mohotiri pertitaa totihia.

to act indifferently, as if nothing happened. pertitaa.

the blue body of Yãmonãmãriwe did not take long to swell. yãmonãmãriwe yetu ke a pata hãepotopi hããi ha kuparuni.

to swell, inflate, dilate. thoroho.

to be afraid. mamoku.

I will hunt, we (you and I) will eat game (lit. yaro ke ya niyãprai pehe a wape.

to shoot an arrow at a target, to kill with a projectile, to kill with an arrow or gunshot. niyãprai.

he/she died (lit. fmishiã a kuami.

to have short breath, not blow hard enough. fmishiã hawe.

to die (lit. fmishiã mrai.

to hold one's breath. fmishiãki mao.

breath, respiration, life force. fmishiã.

you must tie together again the strips of your hammock. wahe thoku he okãã ha kopani.

I am the one who has begotten this boy. hei ipa a re kui ya he okãpema.

to tie, fix the end of something, fasten by knotting the strips forming a hammock. he okã.

dry. wehetiwe.

to crush insects by pressing them between the palms of the hands. hurukuprai.

we discovered a paují perched and killed it. paruri yama a roa ha tararini yama a tharema.

perfective aspect. re.

I will come without a doubt (talking about upriver). ya fuuwei ke the.

I will come without a doubt. fuuwei.

reclámales eso a los de Karohi, ya que sabes expresarte tan bien. hei karohi theri pe riha e ta nakare.

to express oneself, to speak well. nakare.

to hang. shikã nahi.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cacao plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma.

to lean, to bend down, to give way. raiope.

bud, flower bud. huna.

green ibis (bird species). corocoro.

tree that gets stuck on its stump when falling. hi tihe.

1. (Verb Intransitive) tree that gets stuck on its stump when falling 2. (Verb Transitive) to graze, touch lightly. tihe.

to gather its fruits (durative, plural object). mãhomai.

manifestation (of the coolness that precedes dawn). wahariprou.

Oso hormiguero caminaba con la cabeza hacia arriba (buscando algo que estaba sobre los árboles). teperiwe ke a hiyoka wãri nonoãpraroma.

alcé un momento la cabeza (para ver). ya mi re nonotariyowei.

to raise the head, look up. nonotou.

respond to each other, speak one after the other during a ceremonial dialogue. wã huamayou, rec.

respond to each other, speak one after the other during a ceremonial dialogue. wã huamayou.

to stop abruptly (an animal). hothoprakei.

the Spider Spirit crouched in its transparent hammock (asks): "What are you doing. yiipi pata wararawe kuwe ha hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri ha puushitaoni.

spider web. puushitaoni.

in a place where the river was straight the otter started swimming again at the surface of the water. pe u shaririope hami proro ke a wãri urerou kooimama.

I, I will remain immersed in the pleasant freshness of the water. kamiye pei u ha ya si wai ahi toprao hoowe.

liquid, water; stream of water; honey. shaririope.

you can see that I have broken my arrow, I have repaired it by tying a piece to the end of the shaft. shereka ya ha keprarini ya he tikeparema ma re kui.

to repair a broken arrow by fixing two pieces of cane end to end. tikeparei.

come, son-in-law, prepare tobacco for me. ei, shetewe, pee ke nahe ta yakihe.

to address someone using the term shete, to be in the relationship of elder to younger or father-in-law to son-in-law. shetemou.

me di cuenta de que le habías regalado vestimentas a la gente de Tokonawe. tokonawe theri pe rii ha wahe siki ma re hipeakenowe thai.

place name. tokonawe.

the arrow has split into pieces. thoku kakiprariyoma.

it has split into pieces. kakiprariyoma.

expulsar de ira, desalojar; rechazar al enemigo. yatiyatimokirioun.

the shaman had a tortoise as his companion animal. shaporini poshotomi ke a hiima thapoma.

the shaman. shaporini.

I have the feeling that an abscess is forming. yuu a nami kumou.

to form, to construct a temporary shelter. kumou.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

to become spacious, to become extensive (the interior of an object). yaweteprou.

the piapocos perch when they pass over the top of Mount Kanae. kanae keki ora hami mayepiri pe pe ropraai hayuyou no thareshi.

to pass, to leave behind, to cross a space from one edge to the other. kanae.

I was tired of working and stopped. ya ha mohioni ya ohotamou mratariyoma.

to stop, to cease. mohioni.

don't eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

to eat alone; to go to eat at a specific place (animals). ihimorãyou.

(myth): it curled up to jump, it was going to die, it was going to be killed. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to become hard like leather, to shrivel up, to curl up on oneself. pusutuai.

the leaves are covered in dew. y ã ã pe hena hemaãhupi.

to be covered in dew. hemaãhupir.

as Bachaco cut down the trees, the corn started to grow by itself. koyeriwe kihami hii re hiki tuyei re kuaanowei, yono mo hai yauai re kuaaowei.

to occur successively (two events), to happen as a consequence of a previous action. kuaaowei.

we waited for him, he arrived at night. yamaki no tao heama, weyate e koproma.

to wait a long time, to listen attentively. tatao.

to have a beard. kaweiki weuhuwe.

to have hair growing on the chin. kaweii.

what does that one whose hearth is over there do. weti ke the thai.

—¿quién está ahí. —weti ke wa.

what smell do you have. weti naha ke wa ni kuaai.

what quantity. weti naha kuwe.

what does. weti.

to have done something in the past. ayatamarei.

when he reached the last part of his ascent, they (the two of them) made the tree dilate. pe poushokutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

when he reached the last part of his ascent. poushokutohorayou.

the váquiros put themselves to advance very quickly and Pájaro váquiro was advancing along with them. ware ke ki ropaaprarou shoaoheri, aheanariwe a wãri rerea poaaprarou ha kuparuni.

they put themselves to advance very quickly. ropaaprarou.

supernatural beings of the yai the class that can cause illnesses and possess a person. fekrã.

on the shoulders and on the tail he placed a woven basket. pei hakoki hami, pei teshina ha yorehi ke e si kãi re shatimakeiwei.

a woven basket. shatimakeiwei.

to be climbing. torereo.

to be climbing. torereo.

los ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati.

ciempiés venenosos. weyarati.

Cachicamo ate all the honey. moroni puu upe waa hititirema.

all the honey. moroni puu upe.

to be sick, to be possessed by kamakari. forãmi kamakaripi.

to be possessed by the spirit of a dead person; to be sick from ingesting the ashes of a dead person. kamakaripi.

the beast has killed and also it can be The word 'yaro' in Yanomami means 'that'. yaro kahiki no kiriama (mit. It is a Pronoun. ).

I have laziness because I take too many hallucinogens. ya mohi epena pruka ya pe koai yaro.

due to her being pregnant and not being able to run, the jaguar ate her. the shipenapi yaro, the haiprou ha maoni irani the warema (mit.

the beast. yaro.

his older brother, who is there, if only we could live in adjacent homes. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

you and I, we older relatives, are going to live together. kamiye ke yafeki yaiprariyo.

older female relative. yafeki.

now my arrows are caught in the vines, that is what I will say (= now I am old and my arrows get entangled in the vines. hei tehe pe ki sherekaye hãrokãi, ya kãi kupe.

to be entangled, to be caught (figurative sense). hãrokokei.

the váquiros (birds) are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothoprawe.

to never renounce a revenge or aggression. puhi asimoimi.

to never renounce a revenge or aggression. asimoimi.

he picked up kakuruma stones and threw them at Woman-Picure. kakuruma a ha hoketarini, thomiyoma a sheyeprarema.

to hit a person by throwing objects at them. sheyeprai.

to fill (with water in a container). huyukai.

it refers to a man's deceased wife (lit. fshikãpi re thãrimionowei.

the one who kept him company in the shikã (the area under the roof at the back of a dwelling). fshikãpi.

to drool (when asleep or sick). kahu upe yãnão.

to drool, to slobber. yãnã.

the child is hungry. kahu upe yãnã.

to be hungry. yãnã.

knot. kore.

Jaguar was left behind, and arrived weakened by hunger. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

to be weak, without strength; to have lost vitality; to have wrinkled due to the sun (a tobacco leaf). yahato.

to shorten something. onohoprou.

they made me rest again at the place where the path leads out. yo he haope ha yare kãi wãshimi horuu re kopeiwehei.

the place where a path ends or leads out. haope.

again the woman described a curve. suwe e naha ke a tihiyea kuprou ha koroni.

described. tihiyea.

a larva is eating my tooth (lit. ouni yare naki wai.

larva of a beetle; Rhynchophorus palmarum (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). ouni.

osamenta del ala de un ave; conjunto de esos huesos: húmero, radio, cúbito, carpio, metacarpio y falange. hãtãtãmãpi.

to steal (habitually). thomimou.

while the tree is still healthy (= before it is cut), we will wait for the grains to ripen and we will inhale (the hallucinogen). temi re hi uprao tehe peheki ha hãmoãrini, pehe a koararei.

to wait for something to ripen, to let grow, to let enlarge. hãm.

to stubbornly insist for a moment before changing attitude. yatitou.

in the lobe of his ears he put the tail feathers of a parrot. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the teshinaki hore ha huuararini.

lobe of the ear. huuararini.

his two sons, who were shamans, stayed behind to elevate the shelters a little (to prevent them from being submerged). pe ihirupi e kipi re hekuraonowei, e kipi hãtopi nahi tireheaprarou heoma.

to rise a little, to elevate a little, to place a little high. tirehe.

to form a block. hikiniprou.

(something) sinks. mohe kaoko.

to sink in water under the weight of something. kaoko.

to grab, to seize, to grasp. ãkã.

the earth is smooth. mashitha a si kopehewe.

to become smooth, to smooth out. tãihi.

the foreigner killed one of ours. nape ke a wãri ishou kuhe.

he/she/it killed. kuhe.

to clean one. hishão.

a mythological being. babithoka.

brother, don't be angry. ã iwe, a hushuotihe.

don. hushuotihe.

you have seen the mistress of the bamboo tips (that is why you are brave). yawanayoma wa tararema kutaeni (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial).

female spirit associated with bamboo tips. rahakanariwe.

tell your mom to prepare her hammock made of vines for departure. naahe ke iha thoku thapramai ta puhi.

to prepare a hammock made of vines for departure. thapramai.

it was under the sand and, as it moved, it caused the surface to move. kihami mrakatahu re e hirehiremai kuaai shoaoheriiwei.

to cause a disturbance on the surface (by moving underneath it). hirehiremai.

to be very suffocated, to be exhausted. wãshimi hikiniwe.

to be squeezed together (elongated objects). hikiniwe.

to tie a guaral from a tree branch. fãsitha karoramai.

to tie a guaral (fishing line) to a tree branch (to catch catfish at night). karoromakei.

come to place yourself in the center. eyemi ke pari a ta mi ãmoparu.

to place in the center. waropariyoma.

sorocuá; el término se aplica a dos especies: Trogon viridis y Trogon violaceus (Trogonidae). shotokookoomi.

pei. thanoka.

What do I care that you direct your arrows at me. ke ki mi wãri puruhamai ta pera she.

to converge, to head in the same direction, to have one. puruhamai.

(related to leaves). henasi.

he does not do like the others. shoati ke a.

Said of a person whose behavior departs from the usual norms.. shoati.

species (plural). spp.

the arrow broke when it hit something. ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei, thoku kakiprariyoma.

to break into two pieces. hekiprariyo.

to have the face painted uniformly. hirikiwe.

they put bark in the colorant to make it fragrant, that's why it's brilliant. fei nana pe e no kapino, e no kapino fa totiﬁoni, ei re e noshi tererewe.

brilliant, shiny, resplendent. totiﬁoni.

bejuco masimasi. rihu masi.

to bring heavy or bulky objects close to the place where they will be used. ahetepramarei.

canoe too loaded, to the point that water threatens to get inside it. ihetetewe.

to make slippery. takramai.

the mother kept the daughter seated next to her. pe niini pe thee ke the hore tikemapou aheteoma.

to tell someone to keep something/someone closed or in a certain position. aheteoma.

don't look at me eating this, don't let them see me eat so they don't get sick. ai he, ware maikaprarihe: no me miren comer, no ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

embers. ãshoku.

they discovered the sorcerers painted in black, swollen and scattered on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe, pe shuweoma.

swollen, inflated, dilated. shuweoma.

a young girl who was confined because she had her first period, left her confinement unnoticed. muãihi , utu chacha que estaba encerrada porque había tenido las primeras reglas, salió de su reducto sin ser notada.

young girl who had her first menstrual period. muãihi.

he had lost his arrows and also it can be The word 'hoyarini' in Yanomami means 'had lost'. shereka ke ki a ha hoyarini.

lost. hoyarini.

1. yahi therimi: 1. Members of the community to which one belongs; neighbors, members of neighboring communities (often related), with whom a person maintains a close relationship. Miembros de la comunidad a la cual uno pertenece; vecinos, miembros de comunidades vecinas (a menudo emparentados), con los cuales una persona mantiene una relación asidua.

members of the community, neighbors. yahi therimi.

they (the h e k umo) have already abandoned me, I am something they have left behind. tira no ke ya (cha.

to visit during a journey to several communities located in the same region. miswaikiomahe.

I went on foot (not by canoe). wãtetãwashiti ha ya huma.

to go by land (not by canoe). wãtetãwashiti.

to tell someone to dry or smoke something. tetekeamamai.

in the places where the caterpillars are grouped together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) on the embers. kasha ke a werereope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

I arrived at a place where the kasha caterpillars were grouped together (in parallel formation, one with another). kasha ke a werereope hami ya warokema.

to be arranged in parallel, to be grouped together in a parallel formation. werereope.

she descended and stood there. a ha ithoruni pei yo ha a upratariyoma.

to descend, to come down. ithoruni.

your fingers make me ticklish. wa imiki shihiti.

that causes tickles. the shihiti.

to have an itch; to cause tickles. shihiti.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. reiki.

to collapse, to crumble. krããse.

to urinate. niyanasi.

he remained pressed down under it for a long time. a hikitao heatima.

to remain pressed down under an object for a long time. hikitao.

I save money. ya shimomai.

to gather; to accumulate; to pile up; to save (neol.). shimoãi.

as the woman was in love with him, he fled with her. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

to make a woman flee or facilitate her escape; to flee in the company of a woman one loves. wahikei.

we did not take any women, they were all ugly. suwe yama pe toanomi, pe wãritiwe haikiwe ha.

to take a woman, to marry a woman. toanomi.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

an object that others want to borrow, an object that is frequently borrowed. mahimou.

stay where you are, I will walk ahead. miha re a ta kua heiku, kamiye ya huprao pario.

to walk ahead, to go first. huprao.

they (two) placed cotinga skins in the lobe of their ears, and slid parrot tail feathers under their armbands, they looked really magnificent. heimi ke pe ha huupiararini, kurikaya ke teshina pe ha makekeararini, riyehewe totihiwe ke kipi kuoma.

they placed (feathers of the cotinga bird). makekeararini.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

having begun to grow a little. preãkãrãyou.

(no clear translation provided). huke.

to go down (a river) in a place. tererekei.

to be dazzled. mamo shi kirihou.

to be dazzled, to be under the effect of dazzlement. kirihi.

bend, curve, arch. hitho-.

Move away a little, my dear. oãsi, a ta payekeiku.

to move away a little, to separate, to put at an adequate distance. payekekei.

"sigue a los demás", me dijo. "a ta nohãthoyo", yare nowã thama.

follow. nohãthoyo.

I trampled (intentionally) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to trample. katikiakei.

to make hard. hihuamai.

diluted honey. rehere uku.

diluted, thinned out, less concentrated, less thick. rehere.

to go down (of a water level). tererou.

to splash once. hamish-ai.

(he) has bulging eyes. mamoku homou.

to have bulging eyes. mamoku homo.

flower, set of flowers of the same plant. himo.

Bot. kanaye ninihi.

tree. kanaye.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

sweet, sugary. kretetiwe.

the antepasado of the fixed eyes (having just been skinned) sank into the Maharapiwei river. maharapiwei u ha poreri a mamoku royokowe kepariyoma.

river name. Maharapiwei.

to break a clump of cambur or plantain with a pointed and rigid object (bow or stick) in order to collect the bunch it carries. tihekimai.

they two will do it. kama ke kipini the thapipe.

they will do it. thapipe.

sharp (a bamboo tip). hirorowe.

to repeat what was heard (often distorting it in a biased way) from one place to another. wãnotaai.

to cut an animal into pieces. pasheshe.

to make a liquid go from a concentrated state to a less concentrated one. rehereamai.

to divide into several parts. ﬂaka.

(spoken in the south of the Orinoco River. uokimou (habla del sur del Orinoco. ). ).

to be deep. uoko.

they arranged themselves to surround the rock, and discovered the black-painted (dead) sorcerers scattered on the ground. pei re maki kothe hami the pe ãyorii ha shoaimani, okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

they arranged themselves to surround. shoaimani.

the female váquiro ancestors were moving in the center (of the herd). wareriyoma mi ãmo hami pe huma.

designates a female mythical ancestor or hekura. -yoma.

to have pivoted, to have spun around an axis, to have revolved. shimoremorayou.

to overtake someone from both the right and left at the same time. yakaromar.

to be very hungry. fratafratawe.

night fell completely while we were eating. yamaki iyai tehe, yamaki ka he komãrãyou.

we stood for a long time and night fell. yamaki upratao tehe, the mi ka komãi.

to be surprised, to be obstructed, to become numerous, to get dark. komãi.

to loosen quickly or regularly. prorotou.

tree; Cecropia metensis (Cecropiaceae). The bark fibers are used to make bow strings and hammock ropes.. shikri.

to knead cassava flour so that it remains slightly moist inside. urererarei.

she had introduced flowers in the lobe of her ears, and she looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

flower. thoruki.

our. waroo.

to bruise an object in two places (carelessly). wãokãmai.

You all have stolen objects. matohi wama pe toreramai kuhe.

1. To make roll (a round object), 2. To steal, to take away (several objects). toreramai.

she accompanied Tucán to his house. mayepiriwe ke e yahi hami a nokarema.

to accompany. mayepiriwe.

we will kill our enemy (lit. pehe a he wãri ira kaoa totihiparei.

to kill someone by drowning them (lit. to put someone. totihiparei.

to feel itching in several places. shihitipiprou.

the moriche fruits turn slightly yellowish when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

slightly yellowish color that moriche fruits take when they start to ripen. okoroshi.

to get wet, to become covered. urere.

feel headaches after having walked a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue).

vibrate, experience small shakes; sway. tirikiai.

to shrink, reduce. horotou.

to pull out a tooth from the jaw (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetirei.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. siki utu.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. utu.

he sinks his belly. a mi ta wãhetaru.

to sink the belly for a moment. wãhetou.

to paint something red in a specific place, to dye red. momihi.

to paint one's face. mi shopoho.

to dye/tint light red, to allow a fruit to ripen before consuming it, to authorize a young woman to leave the space where she was confined after her first menstruation. shopoho.

that's enough, that's all, that's finished (there's no more of that). fe naha re o enaha re ke: es suﬁciente, es todo, eso se acabó (no hay más de eso).

enough, sufficient. suficiente.

numerous. yatehewe.

to have multiple dizzy spells. mi pe shiwãrihou.

to have multiple dizzy spells. shiwãrihou.

to fear for one. haruhuo.

Titiri was perched on a branch inclined towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma.

inclined, bent. ithoreope.

we set up camp at the place where a dry stream flows into the river. yamaki perikei: instalamos el campamento en el lugar donde un caño seco desemboca en el río.

dry place. hashipe.

strabismus. ashe.

null. toreremi.

flower, set of flowers of the same plant. himo.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (talking about the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

relax, loosen, undo. hihop.

to limp, to hobble. kayeheai.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age) and also it can be The word 'thai' in Yanomami means 'make, do, carry out'. eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

What are you all doing. weti ke wama the rii thai.

kill. thai.

a younger girl than the speaker (male or female): a daughter, a sister, a parallel cousin or any young girl to whom one wants to show affection. nakasimi.

I will make them cry (by killing one of their relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

I will make them cry (by killing one of their relatives). hoyamaiwe.

the pijiguaos (palm tree fruits) cannot be peeled. rasha pe roshiproimi.

I cannot hook it. the rukeproimi.

it is not visible, it cannot be seen. roshiproimi.

come to get us. wamare ta koreyo.

come to get us. koreyo.

to be unable to cure. imiki huheo.

to be unable to cure. huheo.

small deer; Mazama sp. (Cervidae). koshikoshirimi.

tortoise; Platemys platycephala (Chelidae). moshotomi.

he is angry. hutukarami akasi.

to be angry. hutukarami.

decorate your foreheads with white down, yes, that's what must be done. wama weyoku paushimai ha kuparuni, aye minahami.

to decorate, paint and adorn with feathers or bird skins. weyoku.

in an instant we painted our faces black and on that background, we traced sinuous lines with our nails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

they traced lines on their faces. tikekerariyo.

to hit oneself repeatedly (while under the effects of a hallucinogen). paiyorayou.

to make someone give up, to make someone change their mind. kuyemarei.

to trace a line over several objects. yãprutaakei.

the jaguar was dragging the dead woman while the child was perched in the tree. irani suwe ke a nomawe re shaireheriiwei, ihiru a ma tikeo tehe.

to drag, to pull along the ground; to abduct a woman by force. shaikei.

to dominate someone habitually during a confrontation (a game or a fight). kanamou.

to address someone using that term, to be with a female person in a husband-wife relationship. wãhãmamou.

my husband. wãhãmaye.

share your wad of tobacco with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to divide one. hakomai.

to fan, to wave (perfective durative). yahuhurei.

to receive visitors with shouts and noise. eraramo.

go quickly to start pulling/plucking the roof leaves (to prevent the fire from spreading). kiha yaa ke mishiki ukukuprai ta hairo.

to start pulling/plucking (something) towards oneself with the fingers. ukukuprai.

they put chili peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke/cure incompletely (a prey or fish); not to dry perfectly. weheroray.

of the five levels that make up the Yanomami cosmos, two bear this name. hetu misi wãro pata: de los cinco niveles que componen el cosmos yãnomãmi dos llevan este nombre. One is the ground, that is, the level occupied by human beings. Uno es el suelo, es decir el nivel ocupado por los seres humanos. The other is the level immediately below, where the amahiri live. El otro es el nivel inmediatamente inferior, donde viven los amahiri.

one of the five levels of the Yanomami cosmos. hetu misi wãro pata.

Rabipelado flew away. nãroriwe a yerayoherima (mit.

flew away. yerayoherima.

to leave (by negligence) wild vegetation to invade the conucos (cultivated plots). shototamai.

the tábanos have a flattened sucking beak. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

flat, horizontal (the end of an elongated object, especially a stick or piece of wood). tatahai.

the tree is tangled. hii hãã.

to be tangled (a tree), to have gotten caught. hãã.

be quiet (stay calm). a ta shi hirotaru.

to be calm/tranquil. hirotaru.

that one, there, who plays/entertains in the water (referring to the tapir during ceremonial dialogue). mihi a pata re iriamope.

one who plays/entertains in the water (referring to the tapir during ceremonial dialogue). iriamope.

my in-law (before marriage alliance). aipewe.

to become clear, limpid, translucent. herushii.

deseaba metamorfosearse. a shi wãrihou puhio yaro.

metamorphose. wãrihou.

to be naturally in that state, to have the end flat and smooth. simitiwe.

to be about to go to get oneself painted. hirikipramou.

the edge or tip of a tool. koheprou.

plantain compote cooked with the ashes of a deceased person (lit. koai (habla del sur del Orinoco. : honey of ripe plantains). ) tate puu.

ripe, mature (for plantains and peach palms only). tate.

disperse (while walking). pe ta rãikiroheri.

they had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni (mit.

to manifest in several different places. rãikirayou.

leaves used to make the roof of a dwelling and which, being found in distant places, require camping in the forest during their collection. fyãã hena henitiwe.

leaves used to make the roof of a dwelling and which, being found in distant places, require camping in the forest during their collection. henitiwe.

He enclosed (it) with branches or palms. Pesimora you.

to enclose, to protect with a fence or palisade. pesimora.

they are really pijiguaos of the light species. frasha auaurimi pe ma re kui.

in the past the Yanomami did not have cambur plants of the 'short' species. hapa yãnomãmi peni yahatotorimi pe thaponomi.

object that possesses such and such a quality, such and such an aspect. frasha.

totally. waheheprou.

we will accompany. re perapraaiwei: acompañaremos.

we will accompany. acompañaremos.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

1. To untie or loosen all the time. 2. To flee, escape, dodge during an attack.. hihoatarou.

they have lost them all one after the other, and I have had nothing for some time. the pe ha hoyaakiheni ke ya horipraa kure.

lost. hoyaakiheni.

to imitate the behavior of a jaguar, to roar like a jaguar just before going to war. iramou.

your wives deny you tobacco and keep you in need of it. suwepihe pe shi ha imaoni pee ke wama nahe pe ha horipoheni.

to deny something to someone, to keep someone in need of something. imaoni.

ah. si roromi ke iha a nape rurou tikoo yaiope.

to attack someone without a valid reason. rurou.

quality of a hearth. hãto nahi iyomamou.

quality. iyo.

the thunder roars in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to crackle, to rumble (the fire), to roar (the thunder); to be always arguing. frãrãrãmou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). preshetemi.

he killed a tapir in the morning. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema.

you never kill any of them. wama the pe wãri niyaai ma re ma tharei.

to kill, to hunt. niyaa.

go to look for earthworms, we will eat fish before leaving, we will set off after eating them. kohoromi shiki ta yua, yuri peheki ta waheri, heha peheki ha warini peheki huu kooheripe.

to go, to leave, to depart. waheri.

Come, come, you will assume our defense. pei, pei, hapohe, hapohe, yamare nohi peyeape.

our defense. peyeape.

Its long pods contain. Sus largas vainas contieto volviera a salir).

pod. vaina.

unroll your fishing line, and catch the fish there. wa ãsitha ha kushereni, kihi waho ki re titirati, ki ta shaire.

cord, thread, fishing line. shaire.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to have walked through the water. iroropariyo.

he separated several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

separate. tikare.

to relax, loosen, undo (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). hihorayou.

What are you hitting over there. weti ke wa tuyei ta kurawe.

state/duration at a distance, obligatorily with interrogative. rawe.

extend the hand to give or receive something. imiki totoo.

to extend, present, offer. totoo.

kinkajou tail. hãsho si.

kinkajou (Potos flavus). hãsho.

tree. horemariweni.

the manaka palms surrounded the base of a small hill. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha, manaka yahatoto hami the pehi kãi ha tiwaroikuni.

Tapir circled the top of the mountain, carrying a girl on his back. shamariwe pei keki heaka hami a pata tiwarou ha kuparuni, yipi the suwe ha yehireni (mit.

to walk in a circle in front of the domestic hearths; to circumvent, to walk along the middle part of a slope to circumvent the top of an elevation, to go around in a circle. tiwaroo.

it was a good hunting dog. hiima a nihitaoma.

to be a good hunter (of a person, animal or dog), to have good aim. shemahe.

to be about to have one. yakekepramou.

to massage oneself (to relieve a hutuka). huteteo.

to group together for a moment. hiratou.

in the borde of the conuco, matas de plátano se inclinaban hacia el suelo (se habían cosechado los racimos). hikari the ka kasi ha kuratha si mi werepraoma.

to incline towards the ground. werepraoma.

the old man jumped suddenly and transformed into a termite nest hanging upside down from a sisimi tree. pata a yeteprakema, sisimi hi ha orawe koko.

he jumped suddenly. yeteprakema.

make someone carry a heavy load. terekamai.

he caused many striped catfish to flee (lit. pruka araremi pe tokuhamama.

he/she/it caused (something/someone) to flee repeatedly in different places. tokuhamama.

they burned the dead person today. hei tehe pe pomorayoma.

they burned the dead person. pomorayoma.

manner of shouting that. korereamo.

above all, do not come visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to stand up, to arrive at a community and remain standing and motionless in the central plaza waiting to be invited. yororotou.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the jungle. Õmawe y su hermano describieron una curva en la selva.

curve. peria.

apresúrense a quemar su cabeza cuando yo se la haya cortado. pei ya he wãri ha pahetireni, he wãri yaa ta haipahe she.

head. haipahe.

to have the habit of regularly inhaling hallucinogens, to be a shaman. epenapi koo, frec.

shaman. chamán.

you are always whimpering. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to sob, to whimper. eheehemo.

Encyclopedic dictionary of the Yanomami language and also it can be The word 'tahiapi' in Yanomami means 'night'. Diccionario enciclopédico de la lengua yãnomãmi tahiapi.

a guabina yace in the sand. mashapi a pata tahiapi paa.

dictionary. tahiapi.

good word. orawe koko.

word. orawe.

the corn cobs are short. yono mope torohewe.

to be a little long; to have an oblong shape. torohewe.

once I gathered all the leaves (needed to cover the roof) from my father, I then went to get the ones I needed. haye ya henaki ha omarini, ipa ya henaki thai piyea.

to complete, to gather enough. omai.

others are ambushed a little further away. ai the pe rea he piyehetaa.

are ambushed a little further away. piyehetaa.

wait for someone at their house. no tapei.

to wait for someone at their house, to leave or abandon someone/something at home. tapei.

as I resent them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

to feel resentment towards someone. wãriponi.

the arrow got stuck in a branch and they asked him to go get it. shereka a ha shatiikuni a nosiyemamahe: "a ta thaprari", e pe kuma.

to go get something, to fetch something. thaprari.

headdress of the hekura with the shape of a butterfly. watoshe hurahura.

the one who kept him company in the shikã (the area under the roof at the back of the dwelling). thãrimionowei.

they told me not to do it. yare wasirema.

to prohibit, to tell someone not to do something. wasiai.

To oppose it with a rigid and elongated object by stepping on it, to split an arrow in that way. Oponérselo un objeto rígido y alargado pisándolo, partir una ﬂecha de esa manera.

to oppose it. oponérselo.

his two husbands stayed behind. pe heãropi e kipi re hewekeiwei.

his/her two sons were shamans; his/her two husbands stayed behind. kuraoma.

he/she is a jealous person. puhi haruorewe ke a.

the one who is jealous. haruorewe.

I will slap you. pe si poararei.

to slap, to strike once with the flat side of a machete. poaprai.

the fish will slip out of your hands. yuri a he wahoprariyo.

to slip out of one. wahoprariyo.

the woman could liberate herself from me. huko siki yakukuai.

to liberate oneself from. sukukukei.

to make something cylindrical or approximately round spin or rotate many times. hãmorirei.

make them flexible. wa e the ki ha uhutitiprarini.

make flexible. uhutitiprarini.

Mujer-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

flat, level. resisiw.

Zizyphus cinnamomum tree (Rhamnaceae). arowaye ãsihi.

tree. ãsihi.

they live there. pe hiraaharayoa.

they live there, in the forest. hiraaharayoa.

the cat's breasts are hanging down (it is nursing). mishi pe suhe u ka prayukuwe.

to be stretched down, to be hanging down. prayukuwe.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the back part of a canoe; to walk behind. korotamai.

(she) fled, abandoned her community and husband. shi wahimorayou.

to flee, abandon one. wahimorayou.

to have a good memory. puhi shoawe.

Baba cooked in the jungle. urihi hami iwariwe kasha e hãro ripiprai yaioma (mit.

jungle, forest. sel-.

to let fruits reach an excessively ripe state. shoporomapi.

Õmawe advanced crouched (so as not to be seen), and squatted. omawe a ha teretereikuni, a yerekema.

to crouch, to squat. yerekema.

to place two elongated objects leaning against each other. irikikei.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake prai shoaoma, wake pata prariroma (mit.

fall one by one, scatter (fruits, flowers, etc.). prarirou.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense (bows). iyoararini.

Are you still awake. wa rãã shoaa re a kure.

to be awake. rãã.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

to shoot a thin palm wood arrow with a fire-hardened tip, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. tiheheai.

to appear (after). waehe.

the pasarela sank under the water when I crossed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to submerge momentarily under water. paotou.

to tremble, to shiver, to shudder. yatiyatimou.

it is shiny like a wire. hawe ãrãpre ke ki sipo mimou rãtirãtiwe kuwe.

wire. ãrãpre.

to turn halfway, to turn 180 degrees (perfective aspect of the verb). ãhemirãyou.

put yourself on the side of truth (= determine what it is about, what needs to be done). katitiiku.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). fu.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). fu.

jaguar, brave man (lit. fmihi a pata re nosiyemoyahi.

jaguar, brave man. fmihi.

ellos vinieron a defenderlo, si no, el jaguar hubiera acabado arrancándole los ojos. the pe nohi peyerema ha tharei irani the mamo no hokea he yatiroyopi ha.

arrancándole los ojos. yatiroyopi.

to groan. rããmou.

a mythological figure who transformed into the Moon Spirit and whose spilled blood gave rise to warfare among humans. Periporiwe.

they coat all threads and cords used for tying with the sticky substance from the mai kohi tree, in order to fix them. pei ya orãmisiki hami rifuma a mai koshi.

a sticky substance made from the resin of the mai kohi tree. orãmisiki.

to be pregnant (animal). hushuprarou.

I'm going to hurry up to do it first. ya the wapepraai ta shoshokeai.

to hurry up, to do something quickly. wapepraai.

what people say always spreads from one place to another. yãnoãmi the pe ã nohi ma re kuowei, the pe ã nohi kuaai ma re piyekou shiroãiwei.

to spread from one place to another. shiroãiwei.

when the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to become deformed, hardened, twisted, wrinkled. tosheshai.

to remove leaves from the path with one. protihiwe.

to go from one side to the other. hatahatamou.

to go from one side to the other. hatahatamo.

not to worry, not to think about. mohotua.

crouch over there, I will crouch here. miha ke a ta yereiku, kiha kamiye ke ya yereo.

to crouch, to squat, to be crouched or squatted, to perch (for a bird). yereo.

when it thunders hard, one gets startled. ikãri yãru a wã hai tehe the pe kiriapramai.

it was he who treated them as cowards. ihini re pe pe kiri himai kuper e i.

to startle, to treat someone as a coward, to shame. kiriaprai.

to have the custom of sharing someone else's food. fnii ripou.

to arrange food on leaves placed on the ground at the time of distributing and consuming it. fni pakoheai.

to share food. fnii.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the tapirs scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

disperse (and make parallel rows). pe mi ta yoããheri.

to scatter, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããma.

accumulate, sting (insect with stinger). tikamai.

to place crosswise. pririai.

the softening or unrolling of new leaves or cotton balls. reblandecimienãkro.

crotch of a tree. hiki hãkãrãki.

Fork, crotch (of a tree). hãkãrãki.

there is a swampy area (at the bottom of the water), you will fall into it. heãhãtu ke pe praa kuporei, wamaki kepoheri.

to fall into something. kepoheri.

parece que la gente de Shãshãnãwe los hizo cruzar el río en el raudal Karepe. karepe pora hami shãshãnãwe theri pe ãhã pekakuamatayomahe.

a place name. Shãshãnãwe.

the apparitions came to deposit momo fruits in the pile of hammocks where the winged termites were perching. osheri ke pe hãrokomope hami, porepore ke peni momo ke a papraai (mit.

to pile up one on top of the other, to hang hammocks too close together. hãrokomope.

gather the leaves, each one on their side, we will spread them out again (to hide our tracks). hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope.

he piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

to gather, to assemble, to pile up. yototokei.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to habitually stay in the dwelling while others are busy outside. heikitou.

lung. feremopi.

they piled up the hunted animals in front of Horonãmi upon arrival. horonãmi re iha e pe hirapraai yaimou re kupeherouwei.

to pile up upon arrival. kupeherouwei.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). kasitamai.

large edible caterpillar (unidentified) that abounds in certain mountainous regions during the rainy season, several kilos can be harvested in the same place. pãrima si.

to soften a vine or bark by twisting it. yaproteai.

to descend vertically (terminative aspect). wahohoprou.

to be rigid, to be stiff. hirarawe.

I noticed that you had offered a cloth hammock. amaka ke wa ki kãi ma re hipekenowe thai.

I noticed that you had given clothes to the people of Tokonawe. tokonawe theri pe rii ha wahe siki ma re hipeakenowe thai.

manufactured cloth hammock. hipekenowe.

it is said that the man from Horetoi whose skin is covered in white spots wants to come and attack me with magic substances. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

having skin covered in white spots (a skin disease). turuweini.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take a bit of tobacco from one. fako.

to become locally wrinkled, flabby or soft; to let a fruit wrinkle (through negligence). wãpretãi.

I'm going to try. ya ta wapepraa sho.

to try, to test. wapepraa.

to mix (plural objects). koniãkei.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

to be wrinkled, to have wrinkles. rukuruwe.

when the sun is on the horizon in the afternoon. mothoka hiririwe.

when the sun is on the horizon in the afternoon. hiririwe.

en el lugar donde se alzaban rocas puntiagudas unas junto a otras, los trozos de la danta se desparramaron por el suelo (después de caer sobre esas rocas). pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope hami shamariwe a pata akatuhu yapikirariyoma (mit.

puntiagudo, afilado, cortante, aguzado; áspero, rugoso. akatuhu.

1. To bend, to fold (the edge or tip of a tool). 2. To draw up the legs, to draw up the legs in front of the genitals, out of modesty, when sitting on the ground (a woman). 3. To bend, to fold (once on itself) the edge of something, to make a hem on a fabric.. koheãi.

to place oneself. hohãthããi.

to have several blisters. si thorohowe.

to have a blister. rohoa.

to have been about to go get oneself painted. hirikipramorayou.

the frog approaches the cockroach furtively (to eat it). yoyoni horã hesi a nape prakeo.

to approach furtively. prakeo.

they went to the aforementioned place in search of pijiguao palms. ihami rasha si pe taeaprama.

they went to the aforementioned place in search of pijiguao palms. taeaprama.

how are we going to cook the fish. yuri, weti naha the pe tuamouwe.

we are going to cook. tuamouwe.

last vertebra of a bird, which joins with the ilium. kororokei.

to extinguish (a fire). ãkikãi.

to divide a piece of meat or a wad of tobacco into many parts, to offer them. hakokoakei.

to slide down. nihoroãi.

I'm not approaching, I'm going to live in the forest. ya aheteomi, wãyumi ke ya ayou.

To abandon the permanent dwelling to go live in the forest for a time, at a more or less distant place. aheteomi.

middle, center. mi thari.

middle, center. mi thari.

he wants to fall into the hollow of the trunk. hii ka ha a keo puhio yaro.

Hooriwe has the habit of falling down. hooriwe ke pe keoprou.

to fall, to drop. keo.

(it) split, broke in two. siroromi a riyã rajarse, partirse en dos.

to split, crack, break at the edge due to a blow (spherical object). tihatho.

a multitude of fish shake their tails in the water. hei ke the pata riyoyoaprarou kupe.

to move in large numbers (fish shaking their tails). riyoyoaprarou.

I will not be able to. yeishitãkãrãmi.

God created us. Tio ɨpɨtɨawɨ kamɨ.

God. tio.

if other people arrive, I will put my hammock in the carrying basket, cover it, and then go live elsewhere. yãnomãmi re the pe koprou tehe, wii re a ha ya the ki he ha yohokuni shomi hami ke ya no kua totihirayopi.

what does she say we should keep covered. weti ke the pe he hoã yohopou.

to cover, to cover over, to overturn a container (so that its opening is facing down). yohoai.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to experience persistent stomach pains, to have stomach pains regularly. yootho.

to remain lying on belly for a long time. rehotao.

the base of its spines. pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

the base of its spines. ãtãripi.

to do something that one does not want to do. hamalgo que uno no tiene ganas de hacer, hacerlo.

something. hamalgo.

Why are they dancing and having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriãmoãi ta sihewe.

to perform the presentation dance during a festival. iriamo.

the conuco was no longer producing, they prepared wapu fruits and consumed them with water. the pe no oheo ke tehe, wapu ke a ha thaheni u pe koamahe.

to be in famine, to be in a period when the conuco (crop field) produces almost nothing. oheo.

I was afraid and startled: extend the house completely, brother-in-law, build a large one. the auprariyoma: se pumaki yasuai totihikeyoruu, shori, the ta praukuku.

to extend, enlarge, widen. pumaki.

he was on guard and watching the trembling of the tree (lit. the hi tiikou mima.

to fill up to the brim. hiekemakei.

that small thing that is carried tucked between the loincloth and the skin (a knife), I have brought this bow to trade for it. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei.

knife. ruruani.

stagnant water covered with a film. si hererepi.

stagnant water covered with a film, likely due to bacterial or microorganism activity; water containing many plant particles. hererepi.

to flatten the surface of a piece of wood by striking it obliquely. pahayeai.

they removed the pierced body of the man (= they removed from the belly of the monster rahara the body of the man pierced with spears). yãnomãmi ke the tirosha no ukeremahe (mit.

to pierce, to perforate (once). tirosha.

they went to look for termite nests (each one to a different place). ã r epo koko pe kãi teapotayo kuhe.

to go to different places. apotu.

Some snakes (warriors) came here to perch (lie in ambush). oru ke ki re praikiyohe e ye.

to perch, to alight. praikiyohe.

lung. feremopi.

Paint my face red with annatto. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint one. momihou.

to obtain, take or give two objects or two parts of game (or fish). porakataai.

they have blown horeprema at us, they have directed it towards us. kiha horeprema ke pehiki wãri horashikei ma re kurohei, hei horeprema hiki ma re yarepiyekiri.

magic plant cultivated, guate; Maranta arundinacea (Marantaceae). Women pulverize it, deposit the powder in the palm of their hands and blow it against the adversaries of their community in the course of a battle, to provoke their flight. The powder can also be spread over the footprints of enemy warriors, to weaken them and cause them leg pain; delayed in this way, the enemies can be reached and attacked.. horeprema.

to fix the feathering of an arrow. ta*rarei fshereka he okãpei.

to fix the feathering of an arrow. ta*rarei.

Exclamation of surprise or amazement. shio!.

to have been folded or rolled up several times (the edge of an object). wapurerei.

come, come, hit me. pei, pei yare ta sheri.

hit me. sheri.

he let himself be killed uselessly by the men (lit. yãnomãmi ke the pe iha yaro ke a wãri hore suhamou tot i h i o m a.

1. That can be swallowed. 2. To let oneself be swallowed, to let oneself be killed.. suhamou.

Rabipelado threw his poisoned dart at Lizard at the moment when he (mounted on a tree) was working holding on only with his feet. refariwe ke a mi re kayahaaprarou tehe, nãroriwe a horama.

1. To hang and dangle in the void. 2. To be mounted on a tree, with the ankles tied with a vine ring, and let go of the hands to perform a task. kayaha.

an object that can be given a medium or rather large size. prowehamou.

to hide an object behind another. shãhopou.

to follow behind someone. produnosi.

to empty. prokoai.

a huge anaconda was rising on his back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei.

lower back, lumbar muscles. mapuu.

these (trees) were inclined. nahi pe yotehepramoma.

to be inclined, leaning. yoteheprawe.

to have. tener.

se golpeteó los dientes. pei e naki hupehupemoma.

(él dijo) "lo comí" y se dio golpecitos en los incisivos con la punta del índice. "ya warei ke a kuroi", pei e naki hupehupemoma.

golpetear. hupehupemou.

honey river. puutha ke u.

honey. puutha.

I left my arrow there where it was (in a tree where the speaker could not go to get it). shereka ya shi wãrimakema.

to leave something where it is (because the speaker could not retrieve it). wãmakei.

the women went there to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of a temporary shelter. fhurohuroma kreai.

to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of a temporary shelter. kreamahe.

(he) was urinating to put out the fire and also it can be The word 'wake' in Yanomami means 'to ignite'. wake niya misi ha ruamani.

flame. wake.

he deposited the arrows on the ground suddenly. shereka ke ki re pratakeiwei.

to deposit or place something on the ground suddenly or with a quick motion. pratakeiwei.

in the house the wind blew in a terrifying way. watori yahi ha ke a no kirihoma.

to become terrifying, horrible, repugnant; to be impressive (due to quantity). kirihoma.

he speaks frankly, without hiding what he thinks. moro ahetea a wai hikooma.

frankly, without hiding what one thinks. hikooma.

the arrendajos (birds) of yellow back (lit: the arrendajos of back yellow bright). ishãromi mope herasi re frãrewei.

in ancient times the people of the white-backed arrendajos were the owners of the light-colored pijiguaos (birds). ãyãkorãri mope re herasi re auwei mopeni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe.

red, reddish. herasi.

the opening of the basket is narrower than its base. yorehi si ka iyoyowe.

to have a narrower opening than the base. iyoyoa.

to cause the noise produced by the vibrations of a taut string. phãophãomomai.

The woman, who was coming out of isolation after having her first period, walked behind. suwe a shuhuhuru huu prihãtou hooma: la mujer, que salía del aislamiento al tener sus primeras reglas, caminaba retrasada.

to walk behind. yipimo.

to periodically lack food (from fields). ohetou.

to start to crush, lacerate, reduce to pieces, crush under a weight, let food disintegrate from overcooking. nahihiprai.

he approached them completely. a ha tikukutoni, a ha hamorioni, the pe horiã ha hititirarini, the pe hoketamama.

to approach them completely. hoketamama.

Pájaro váquiro took a shortcut going directly through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to take a shortcut through the forest. aheanariwe.

a jaguar was about to devour us. irani wamareki mori waaprai kuhe.

to make someone eat, to allow someone to eat, to let someone eat. waamarei.

to let someone go live elsewhere. yakemai.

to go live separated from others. payekerayou.

to protect oneself by placing. hikoromou.

to be angry. herushirimi.

to lie diagonally in a hammock with someone (being careful not to wake them up). pririmou.

¡atención, sus voces se hunden bajo tierra. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

casi me da en la cabeza (manera de decir). fya he wai shetou.

la tortuga poshotomi abrió la boca y sumergió su cabeza (dentro de la herida). poshotomi ke pe kahiki wai kushetou ha yaironi pe he wai ohou ha totihiparuni.

to sink, to submerge. shetou.

to have aligned (perfective of the inchoative form). shaninirayou.

it was him who kept my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object under water by placing a stone on top of it. kaokopou.

son, follow me closely. oãsi kamiye re rihami a nosi ta prakeiku.

follow closely. prakeiku.

they (the two) knocked down bunches of pijiguao fruits with a stick. rasha ke ki rekapima.

to bring closer with a stick an object that is difficult to reach. rekapima.

(the pijiguao palms). ikreherayou.

to carry a heavy load effortlessly and habitually. hereheaprai.

at this point the water is not deep. noco.

two beautiful women have just arrived at the house. riyehewe ke kipi suwe kopei kuhe.

the high tobacco leaves are beautiful and abundant. hisihisi pee re nahe pata riyehewe yorukou thare.

to beautify, to make beautiful. riyehou.

to be about to have transverse lines painted on one. tiprutupramou.

to be in the last position (during a collective journey through the jungle). shiokaai.

hammock. moena.

they came ashore, they gathered with us. pe hashirikei, pe warokei.

to come ashore, to reach dry land. hashirikei.

women, cook (in water) the food (prepare the food). suwe pewe, nii pe ta hariapotuhe.

cook (in water), prepare food. hariapotuhe.

in this direction are my conuco and my house. kiha ke ya hikaripi praa kupiyeheri, ya shaponopi praa kure.

conuco. hikaripi.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to tell one after another to do something. osiyemopraai.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been fixed (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie tightly with many turns, to secure firmly in this way all the vines at the end of a hammock. hatetai.

to fan the fire. yahuhupei.

to finally start speaking calmly. wã okeoprou.

to finally start speaking calmly. okeoprou.

the hekura smiled. hekura ke pe kasi watetoma.

they smiled. watetoma.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. fmomo.

to make love (said by a man). nihoronihoromo.

you will make love many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already made love. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

you will make love many times. wamotipe.

they ran immediately to the garden to pick peppers. hikari hami praki a hukai mi rereo re shoatariyonowei.

they fled one after another. the pe rereokema.

to run, to flee running. rereo.

they spend time making love. a shiro wamotii.

to be always eating, to eat for a long time. watii.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). shuu.

to be angry. ishoroko.

To begin to. uhehe.

we stopped for a good while on the summit (of the mountain). hesika hami yamaki uprahataoma.

we stopped for a while. uprahataoma.

to wear a loincloth (lit. shina reia.

to have hanging down, to wear (a loincloth). reia.

I removed the ocumos (from the boiled water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to remove debris that has fallen into water or food by catching it with something (a stick, a spoon, etc.); to remove, extract several objects in the indicated manner. hikeprai.

to be a little strong (noise), pungent or acrid. nakehe.

when I fell again after jumping over a water hole, I stepped on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

depression or hole in the ground where rainwater accumulates. katikir.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

to move, to displace oneself. ãweãwemou.

to smooth out; to homogenize. kopehea.

to be impatient, to be in a hurry. harira.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashiamai.

to have painted several motifs composed of crossed lines, to have decorated completely with crossed lines. yãrihirei.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

1. to relax, loosen, undo; 2. to untie, loosen; 3. to flee, escape, evade during an attack. hiho-.

the hallucinogen ayukuma gives hunger. ayukuma peni the pe ohetramai.

to provoke hunger, to give hunger. oheamai.

to mix, to blend. feshihi.

to shrink, reduce (perfective aspect). horotorayou.

tonsure. he mãrokoshi.

to collect the hallucinogenic substance (lit. fayukuma yoai.

hallucinogenic substance. fayukuma.

to become longer than. frapahaai.

it does not give colic to women (when offering them honey to eat). suwe pe shuumou marihe.

to have colic. shuumou.

to abandon definitively a task before completing it. waikiprou.

to doze off, fall asleep. he hererewe.

to doze off, fall asleep. herere.

Are you still a good shooter. wa nihite ha shoaa.

to be a good hunter/shooter. shoaa.

my brother-in-law (vocative or reference form used during shamanic sessions). shorimawe.

to be hungry. wawehe.

asió la bola de colorante con la cual se frotó el pecho. nara a ha hurihireni pariki oni hirihirikema.

asió. hurihireni.

we will arrive now at the place called Kãmohãwe (downriver). kãmohãwe ha hei tehe pemaki kuaai shoaparekirio.

we will arrive. shoaparekirio.

to crumble, to collapse (durative 2). hishishou.

he whistled when he was near the entrance (of the south of the Orinoco). pei yoka ha a ahetou tehe a husi koikoimoma.

1. to approach (continuation of aheai), 2. to not be afraid of approaching (a relative, a hostile person). ahetou.

to line up in the center of the dwelling. shaninipei.

I was still walking on the path when night fell on me. pei yoka hami ya huu shoao tehe ya he ka komãrayoma.

at night. komãrayoma.

to twist, bend the tip of an object. toyekeprou.

to be locally folded/pleated. wãhiã.

the fierce beast approached rapidly. y aro ke a pata re ikuikutakeiwei.

to approach rapidly. ikuikutakeiwei.

to nibble, to chew. wenikiai.

(He) climbs the hill. horãma ke yãmoo.

to climb, to ascend. yãmo.

to taste with the tip of the tongue. tepai.

to be slightly yellow, brown. fashihi.

to vomit. apohipe.

he went down again (along the trunk). the ithoa theri ha kothoherini.

to go down, descend in a straight line, march in a line, go to the foot of a tree, etc.. tothe.

the man arrived at a place where spirits lived. rea, tia warokema.

to live in, to inhabit different places. tia.

he took the woman by the arm and had sex with her silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to have sex (when spoken by a man). wamou.

to acquire an oblong shape; to elongate a little. toroherayou.

The devil's whisper is barely audible. decilla del demonio omãyãri apenas se escucha.

barely audible. omãyãri.

pe yesi: 3rd person possessive, his/her mother-in-law. pe yesi: 3ra. t e p eyoma pe yesi e kuoma: The anteater woman was already his mother-in-law. pers.

mother-in-law. mu-.

to take the word to defend someone during a dispute. nowã huai.

to take the word to defend someone during a dispute. nowã hu.

things that are firmly tied or fixed. rohothoprawe.

give that to the one who is lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

to remain for a long time lying in the shikã (lower part of the roof) of a dwelling. shikãtao.

to place someone behind to protect from aggression. sipoamai.

a little, in small quantity. wãsisipi.

I accompany the others downriver to the garden. ya ta hu nareokiri sho.

they went to harvest together. nape hii ke iha suwe a mori tokuu nareo tehe.

to accompany, go with others. nareoherii.

I always respond to the demands of brave men. yãnomãmi kurahewe the pe riha ya the pe ã huamai si ihehewe.

brave. kurehewe.

to start dividing, to begin separating. shetekepramou.

this will loosen (= this will come undone). the prohoai.

to loosen, to be loose, to tie loosely. prohoai.

the tembladors gave me several shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador fish. tifeki.

voy a tocarte la nariz con el glande. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

1. to touch once with the glans, 2. the state of having been touched with the glans (considered repugnant for a Yanomami). tiprushi.

come honey. puu upe ta wari.

come. wari.

to make many mistakes while speaking. aka hãrohai.

he abandons what he is doing all the time. a shiro huhehou.

they did not crush the bones of the deceased (recently cremated), although they were fragmented. pei ishi pe kãi tikai mahei, oshohore ke ki ma kopehou totihio tehe (mit.

denotes a repetition, an act or a process of transformation that is repeated several times (one or several subjects). hãrohai.

don't you see that it speaks like them (the Waika people). ei ke e nou ma re pashiomouwei.

(to) speak like the people from upriver, (to) speak with an accent, (to) speak a language that differs slightly from the local way of speaking. pashio.

it began to rain heavily. yetu maa ke pe horã pata re petarurei.

it began to rain. petarurei.

to blacken. ennegrecer.

to unravel, untwist, or fray continuously. kusheshou.

ellos se convirtieron en coatíes. yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma (mit.

coati, zorro guache. yarushe.

to stand on tiptoes. mamiki hitesheai.

to stand on tiptoes. hiteshe.

to shorten, to reduce (speaking of an arrow that, after receiving several impacts, breaks several times). hatakaai.

I wait for the cassava to mature before eating it. nashi ya koko etemai.

to let (something) mature before consuming it. etemarei.

to make slide an object down a slope, to cause to slide. nihoroãmãi.

to age, to deteriorate (an object). hoteamai.

you have yellow urine. wa niaasi frãre.

to become yellow, to acquire a yellowish and sickly tint. frãrãi.

the arrow missed the target (lit. shereka a yakerayoma.

to make a mistake, to miss a target. yakei.

mustache (lit. hutosi koi.

upper lip. hutosi.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense a bow (plural subject). iyohoai.

to receive a tobacco wad prepared by folding and pressing tobacco leaves with ash. humipei.

the small stream of water becomes narrower and narrower. poko u he horokoai.

to end abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horoko.

give me that dog (lit. hei a re houhoumowei, a ta prapari.

dog. houhoumowei.

the termites will hollow out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororoprarei.

termites will hollow out. shipeni.

when I am like this under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after another all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects, at different times; can also connote a frequentative. opro.

to be about to have someone paint two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakirapramou.

por aquí pasaron váquiros. heyemi ware ke ki kurayoma.

los Yãnomãmi se transformaron en váquiros. yãnomãmi the pe wareprariyoma ware (mit.

manera de decir que uno comparte la comida de los demás (lit. fware a ni hoã re oore.

váquiro (animal). warepi.

and here they are, arriving one after the other, coming to live in my chest. wa ki kuorani, wa ki peripraai ta kuparuhani.

coming to live in my chest. kuparuhani.

to let something rot, to let something take on a bad smell. hithãrimai.

being a child, I really woke up. the puﬁ moyawea totihirihe.

I woke up. totihirihe.

roof of woven palm leaves of the collective dwelling (shapono). sope.

generic term applied to macaws. maraka.

hair that shows slightly brown reflections. he ashi.

tobacco quid (prepared tobacco, ready to chew). pee nahe ashi (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to be slightly yellow, brown, ochre yellowish. ashihihi.

to become dusty, to get covered in dust. hekãhekãpirayou.

Tiger snake hunter. Erpiente tigra cazadora.

tiger. tigra.

to reflect, to seek a solution; to search in memory. taerayou.

The woodpecker clung to the curare vine and pecked it (the pecking sounds were heard). mamokori ira ke a yaupe ha ripuhusiwe a ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

short and rapid blows, like the pecking of a bird. ripuhusiwe.

state of being content. puhi topraa.

to tie or bind something (plural objects) in a perfective aspect. ãteteãkei.

when there is nothing to eat one does not have much desire to work (lit. enaha re sipe oheprou kuo totihio, the pe aohotamapou ma re mai.

to have no desire to work. aohotamapou.

to place or be stuck to someone. pakuku.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

food that has been chewed. wãshikã.

Sorocuá advanced staggering, and then collapsed. kurekurethawe re e krei re kuaaheriiwei, a shea shoaparema.

to stagger, to sway back and forth; to tilt, to lean forward and backward; to sway, to rock, to totter, to stagger in a threatening way. kuaaheriiwei.

he is my husband. heãroye ke a.

(in the myth) they placed the woman's body below, her husband's above. pe suwepi e pepimakemahe, pe heãropi e hiki hetumakemahe.

to call someone husband, to have a husband-wife relationship with someone. heãromou.

husband. heãropi.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

1. To speak frankly, not hide what one thinks. 2. To constantly utter death threats.. hoyã.

knot in the wood. fhi moshoko.

knot. motohe.

they must sing together, they must sing. pe ta amoamo, pe ta heri.

sing together. amoamo.

to raise a daughter, to make her grow; to wait for a girl to be pubescent (to marry her, to consummate a union, etc.). mokomai.

erekou: the way spiders move. erekou: modo de locomoción de las arañas. wariomi koheshiki erekou: the wariomi koheshi spiders move. wariomi koheshiki erekou: las arañas wariomi koheshi se desplazan.

to climb trees by hugging the trunk with arms and legs. ereke.

to unravel, untwist, unthread completely. kushesheprou.

pequeño, abre la boca. shei, kahiki ta rereparu.

open the mouth. rereparu.

there is a lot of tobacco, when I have finished harvesting the high leaves of the plants, I will go. pe nohi kuatarou ha yaironi, ya the pe wai hisihisipi ha hititiprarini, ya nohi mohotua totihirayou.

the otter disappeared in a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuprou.

to go and come back, to come and go. mohotuaprarou.

to change topics constantly during a conversation, to talk about this and that. wã yaiatarou.

to be different from one another, to change topics constantly during a conversation, to talk about this and that. yaiatarou.

alone (person only). sheketeprou.

He turned over (in his hammock) and also it can be The word 'yoawe' in Yanomami means 'Yoawe (mythological figure)'. Yoawe se dio vuelta (en su chinchorro).

he turned over. yoawe.

this is my son-in-law. fekamaye ke a (habla de río arriba.

my son-in-law. hekamaye.

lamentablemente los hekura volvieron minúscula la boca del jaguar. yãnomãmi the hekurapini ira kahiki wãsipipramai tikorayoma.

small amount of something. wiisipi.

come little one (son-in-law), you will lick my fingers (after I have harvested honey). hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape (mit.

affectionate kinship term, used by parents-in-law (male or female) to address their son-in-law. horupe.

he sinks his belly. a mi ta wãhetaru.

to sink the belly for a moment. wãhetou.

to grow, to develop a little (plant). tirerai.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them apart. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to plant (trees/plants) spaced apart. shororokei.

when I was going there, passing by they made me give food. kihami ya hutayou ha, nii ya ki wapou hayuyoma.

to make someone give food. hutayou.

he is angry. nakasiki warirorewe.

to be angry. nakasiki.

to loosen a little, to slacken, etc.. fprehuhu.

ketipa mo: edible seed of the plantain. ketipa mo: semilla comestible del platanillo. They are toasted on the embers within their rigid shell. Se las tuesta sobre la brasa dentro de su rígida envoltura.

edible seed of the plantain. ketipa mo.

the tender pulp of a fruit (for example, the pulp of the milky fruit that adheres to the shell). wãkekeãrei.

to snort (perfective of inchoative); to snort (perfective of durative). rekukurei.

she went again towards the wapu fruits (to eat them). wapu ke ki nape hua korã.

to go towards, to approach. korã-.

He is being determined to go. Niyou wake huu.

determined. niyou.

to boil vigorously. krothakrothamo.

they believed it was the roar of a jaguar and were afraid to go outside, to the forest. ira ke a wã re puhimaiwei, urihi hami, sipo hami, pe huu kiri shoaoma.

the forest; the jungle. puhimaiwei.

to mix two powders in that way. tikururei.

the arrow just got caught (when falling). shereka a hãã re tikoikuhe.

to get caught/hooked. tikoikuhe.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially hollowed out the shrub trunk. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to acquire a more or less circular hollowed out mark (on a cylindrical or spherical object). esheheã.

the alucinógeno ayukuma gives hunger (lit: the alucinogenic ayukuma makes one have hunger). ayukuma peni the pe ohetrabajar.

to have hunger, to be hungry. etener.

he closed the hole firmly. a ka kahua rohothokema.

closed firmly. rohothokema.

to touch everything, to be always grabbing other people. tiherou.

1. Fragment a bone by splitting it with a knife or machete, to make arrowheads for harpoon arrows. 2. Forcefully blow a dose of hallucinogen into someone. tikaroprai.

not manage to fall asleep. shimakamo.

to feel strange due to the effect of a magic substance. ya imiki puhipe yai thaai.

to have a strange sensation, to not feel like oneself. puhipe yai tha.

I abandoned the region where I lived. ipa ya hiki hãii ha kuikuni.

to abandon a region where one lived. yãrãremai.

to speak in a low voice. wahatomou.

to stand on tiptoe for a moment. hiteshetou.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama.

to swell, inflate, dilate repeatedly. shuwetaai.

to cover the ground, to be scattered in large quantities on the ground (wild fruits). poshoshoa.

1) to reach the last part of a journey; 2) to cross, to cut transversely; to draw intersecting lines. yahetiai.

those who made cotton balls carried several with them, and accompanied (the visitors). shinari uko re thaiwehei the pe ha yehiarariheni pe nokaope.

accompany. nokaope.

"no estará ella simplemente engañándome" (se) dijo él. ware hore mirãmãi peo ma ta thawe.

1. to deceive oneself, to nurture false hopes, to be mistaken about someone. mirã.

in this direction are my conuco and my house. kiha ke ya hikaripi praa kupiyeheri, ya shaponopi praa kure.

this. kiha.

to not speak frankly. horemou.

the otter used to take refuge (= disappear) in a small hole. wãisikiripi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuoprou yaioma.

small; scarce; a little. wãisikiripi.

to be. hisi.

to bend, to curve upwards. yãprekeãi.

container that contains seeds. paheãrohe.

to become smooth, to become smooth and moist. frakaha.

in the forest she tied the ends of a palm frond (to make a container with it), then she gave birth (inside) to a compact mass. urihi ha karaha si he ha okãpani, the pe pata wareramai kukema.

expel in a compact mass composed of many elements. wareramai.

calm down. a ta waikitaru.

to calm down after getting angry, to become tranquil. waikitou.

The Yanomami consider it a repugnant animal, they refuse to touch it and of course they do not eat it. Los Yãnomãmi lo consideran un animal repugnante, se niegan a tocarlo y por supuesto no lo comen.

snail (unidentified (animal, plant)). warora.

to bite one's lower lip. fkasiki wetiwetimou.

to give honey to others to drink, to be. fkasiki okemai.

lower lip. fkasiki.

he went outside and crouched from place to place on old, hard, rotten tree trunks. sipo hami ãmãrokoma ke pe hami a wãri tikeataroma.

to go outside and crouch from place to place on dead, hard tree trunks. tikeataroma.

to make a little fat. preãkãmarei.

the tapirs are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were many rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be stopped/at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothothoã.

to expel a liquid by twisting or squeezing. wehetiprou.

straight. rahaka*.

edible fruit of the pasho ãhuhi shrub. ãhuthami.

not ves que habla como ellos. ei ke e nou ma re pashiomouwei.

speaks like them. pashiomouwei.

to peel off, to remove the outer layer of an object using an instrument. hikekerayou.

they (two) found on the ground a cooked caterpillar and picked it up. kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepireiwei.

they (two) found on the ground and picked up. hokepireiwei.

if they come to visit us, I will hide the pot in the forest. pe hamamou ha urihi hami hapoka ya si hithekei.

I will hide. hithekei.

prey. váquiros.

they killed him and left. a ha sheriheni pe korayoma.

they killed him. sheriheni.

they are establishing a new conuco upriver. ora hami pe hikarimou piyeo.

(it is said in the myth) then he transformed into an ash-colored heron. pasho re e si kuprou piyerayoma (mit.

he named the different places in the forest (in the myth). urihi ke ki ãhã weyei piyekoma (mit.

to do something in a different place, to change activity or instrument. piyekoma.

to taste with the tip of the tongue. tepai.

we are in the company of people who are not from our community, but we are the ones who tie the arrow canes in the middle (that we have just collected, to transport them). kamiye yamaki re heshihiomopotayouwei, shereka ke yama peishoku pata re thaamaperei.

to be in the company of people from another community or many other communities. heshihi.

I will transport a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

I will transport. totihikei.

am I not right. ya re pehetiwe.

to have reason, to be right. pehetiwe.

to work with a burin (thomi naki). tekeke.

to be damaged locally (a fruit). pe1.

he is my son. ihiruye ke a.

my son. ihiruye.

to rub hands with heri. fimiki he horomou.

it seems that the combat staff has been rubbed with heri. hii nami he ha horooni.

to rub vigorously. huri.

the footprint of the váquiros is not very old (still a little fresh). ware pe mãyo weyahawe.

footprint/trail that is a little old. weyahawe.

it has turned white (locally, in a precise place). the aukema.

only one spot has burned. the ishikema.

in a precise place, or a locally circumscribed activity (that does not affect the entirety of the object in question). aukema.

to bend, to twist. koheheprou.

to shoot with a shotgun. homopramai.

to fish (usually a feminine activity of catching fish in lagoons by forming a line and trapping them in baskets held in front while advancing slowly). yurimou.

eat, blind (person). hupewe, a ta iya.

blind (person). hupewe.

(lit. mroosiri (lit. the people of the flies). el pueblo de las moscas).

fly. mroo.

he/she has a protruding belly. shipreteprou.

to be pot-bellied, to have a protruding belly. shiprete.

to carve by striking precise blows with a sharp instrument (machete, knife). thaprai.

1) to come off as a result of a blow (a fragment). 2) to hit sideways. yayeti.

the canoe is corroded in parts by rot. kanawa a rep i s i.

to become thin, to be corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisai.

while Horonami remained in the house, his son went to where Titiri was lamenting. horonami yahi a kuo heai tehe, pe ihirupi titiri a re miã ikinowei hami a ukukema.

to go to where someone is lamenting. ikinowei.

to be crowded together (human beings). yayowe.

to be crowded together (human beings). yayowe.

it. pepraai.

to shout when one is in a dangerous situation, to call for help. sirãrãmou.

to steal the same object several times. thomitaai.

they constructed the path. the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

they constructed the. yaioherimahe.

to start looking with crossed eyes. mamo repoo.

to look with crossed eyes. repo.

blanket. kopiha.

receiving visitors with shouts and noise. teraramou.

the inflorescences of the pijiguaos hang in the void. mi kayahap rawe.

to hang, to be suspended. kayahap.

unoccupied space inside a dwelling. hikokowe.

to allow someone to possess a canoe. kãtãpou.

to possess a canoe. tãpou.

(talk of upstream). purima ãhutho.

upstream. ãhutho.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

to strangle. shiãrei.

The child climbed the tree and shook a branch. ihiru ke a wai ha torekuni, hii poko raekama.

to shake. raeke.

vanagloriarse, hablar de sus hazañas de guerrero o cazador (ciertas o supuestas), vanagloriarse de sus relaciones sexuales. noka heke.

to boast. heke.

to have this kinship relationship with someone, to address someone using this kinship term. aipemou.

to curve multiple objects, give them the shape of an arc. payokoakei.

your songs (for the deceased) are not heard. pemaki ãmoã ã wãri hiriimi.

your songs (for the deceased). hiriimi.

to bruise in one place. si ãiki.

taken by force. komãkei.

he has teeth arranged in a very irregular manner (offensive). a naki parerewe.

having teeth arranged in a very irregular manner (offensive). parerewe.

(perfective). hurayou.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

to deposit, to decant, to form a deposit. papehai.

it coils as it falls, like a large turd. hawe shii the pata yorirou.

to fall slowly while coiling or rolling up. yorirai.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit. kesherayou.

Did you remove the leaves covering the tobacco plants when you went to the garden. hikari hami waheki huu tehe pee wahe naheki he karorarema.

to uncover, discover, remove covering. karoakei.

to have a light skin blemish (probably a fungus). wahipiai.

to make exit or enter, to give birth, to sprout. fa.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downwards. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to curve sharply downwards. wahohoa.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. eyeha ke ware wãri yeﬁi, pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

nuca. yeﬁi.

they retroceded on their steps. pe he re tatoprariyoheriiwei.

they retroceded/went back on their steps. tatoprariyoheriiwei.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic). wãhe.

it descended upon me (to help me combat the demon that is in the sick person). sipararithawe ye cha.

to descend upon (to help combat the demon that is in the sick person). sipararithawe.

1. To thin out, become thin. 2. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails.. tiresheai.

to take an object without looking at the person. mamoku si he nohoãi.

to take an object without looking at the person. nohoãi.

Let's go to Mount Maiyo. Maiyo keki hami e.

Let. Maiyo!.

Hija mía, apresúrate a ir a darle de comer a tu esposo (ubicado enfrente). oãsimi heãrohe nii e ki wai hipea ta haikuhuru.

kupohorurei : allá hay un nido de abejas (lo descubrí hace tiempo). kiha puu a kua cimos salir a todos al llegar.

to do upon arriving. -rayou.

mother, come back to live here (with us). naye, the wãri peria ta komakiyo.

my mother. naye.

to cut and shape the flight feathers of a bird to make arrowheads. heki kretitiai.

to cut and shape the flight feathers of a bird to make arrowheads. kretitiai.

he was approaching the beehive when Hairless shot him with a poisoned dart. oi ke a yotoharimai poushokuai tehe, nãroni a horama.

to undertake the last part of a journey, to not be too far from the goal during a journey; to approach. poushokuai.

I came down several times from the hammock to stoke the fire. ya ha ithotoni, koa ya wake pe yetaai kuperei.

to descend, to come down. ithotoni.

to give someone an object received from another person. piyemai.

to start diminishing, shrinking, narrowing. wãisipiprai.

I got sick from the cajaro grease. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not completely in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, I. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

substance (hallucinogen, tobacco, food, etc.); to lose one. wãrimai.

to hang near the ground, to tie low (multiple objects). yahatotomai.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokem.

to widen progressively towards the edge (in a conical or bell shape). eheteai.

to smell bad, to stink, to reek. ni wãriãi.

to smell bad, to stink, to reek. wãriãi.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

struck. asestó.

the pijiguaos start to become large. rasha ke ki primomou.

to start to become large (pijiguaos). primomou.

the noise moves away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to become barely perceptible to the senses (hearing, sight, taste). manashiai.

bow coated with sticky and shiny black sap. hãto nahi sipo tapitapipi.

to be coated with a sticky and shiny black sap (moshima). tapitapipi.

Woodpecker clung to the curare vine and pecked it rapidly. mamokori ira ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni a tootoomoma.

to strike or peck rapidly and repeatedly. yetepraikuni.

they quickly tied torches and waved them in front of themselves as they moved. kai ke wake pe ha okãokãtaarariheni pe yãikoherima.

they quickly tied torches and waved them in front of themselves as they moved. okãokãtaarariheni.

to bathe, to wash oneself. aumou.

to possess a large number of certain objects. thethepou.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

kohere. kohere.

the flood waters came pushing the Waika people in front of it. motu ke u hai ha kuikuni, waika ke pe pararumai ha kuikuni (mit.

to lead someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child); to make someone walk in front of oneself; to push something in front of oneself (e.g. fishing baskets). pararuamai.

to make flutter; to cause to fly. shuriri.

colored. coloreadas.

he lay in a cotton hammock and looked around. yii ke ki ha a perirani the pe mii piyekou.

while, at the same time that. perirani.

the child has the habit of being carried. ihiru a yehio.

to carry. yehio.

to hang downwards. colgar en dirección al suelo.

to hang. colgar.

short (animal, plant). horotoprawe.

los antepasados eran grandes chamanes y resucitaban. the pe re hekuramonowei, the pe re horipronowei.

resucitaban. horipronowei.

to blow. puruu.

his eyes examined everything carefully. the mamoku moyaweaprarou ha yaiikuni.

to move around cautiously, to walk while being on guard. moyaweaprarou.

they had put themselves one next to the other and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

side of the other. thã-.

I make myself called. ya nakamamou.

I make myself called. nakamamou.

to scratch someone repeatedly, to cause multiple superficial wounds; to have been superficially wounded multiple times in a row. si yahehe.

to make a woman sterile using shapo. shapopiamai.

it is behind. the nohãmiwe.

to be situated behind. nohãmiwe.

to die. kete.

the upper part of the skull. hemi.

at dawn they left, each one on their own, to kill paujíes (from the result I realized that) their harpoon-tipped arrows had not missed the target. paruri pe nape ha huomopotuheni, pe the pe no kroshokroshoprao henaopereshi.

to strike with a pointed object, to spear someone, to kill with a harpoon-tipped arrow. kroshomou.

to advance through muddy ground. kaweheaprarou.

1. To become soft, muddy, marshy. 2. To seize with claws (bird of prey). 3. To fight by striking with feet (a bird).. kawehe.

to make something beautiful, to do something correctly and carefully. koshãpikei.

they hung the woman's hammock below and the man's hammock above. pe heãropi e hiki hetumakemahe.

to hang hammocks one above the other. hetumou.

to transform into a chrysalis. si yomou.

to transform into a chrysalis. yomou.

esos son nuestros viejos guayucos (los de ellos y el mío). kamiye yamaki wayukopi hote.

son los guayucos de los niños. ihiru ke pe wayukopi.

guayuco (traditional Yanomami loincloth). wayukopi.

to be startled. kirioprou.

I'm going to prepare moriche fruits (by softening them in water). eweshi ya uku ta furukuku.

he crushed leaves with his fingers several times in a row (to have good luck in the search for honey). yãã ke henaki wãri ha hurukutaararini.

to crush by rubbing with the fingers; to crumble in the hand, to crush leaves when abandoning a path for good luck during a search. furukuku.

to leave a bit of food. fshee heprai.

to leave, to abandon. fshee.

penetrate into very dense vegetation. paimiãherii.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. hãthoreni.

Zool. Zool. , giant otter; Pteronura brasiliensis (Mustelidae). , nutria gigante; Pteronura brasiliensis (Mustelidae).

giant otter. hetehiã.

to take, to obtain. pãyerekerei.

the night fell, he could not fall asleep. e the mi titirayoma, a shimakamou he haruma (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to fall asleep. hirimo.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been secured (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie firmly with many turns, to secure all the vines at the end of a hammock in this way. hatetepe.

to shake something planted in the ground, to verify if it is firmly rooted; to persistently sway (an object planted in the ground). hãwekãi.

tira los chinchorros vacíos (de los hekura que se han ido), inhala alucinógenos, que los chamanes tracen un nuevo camino (para los hekura) y tú te pondrás pesado otra vez (= los hekura volverán a alojarse en tu cuerpo). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

to become heavy; to acquire again the hekura spirits and thus gain weight and power (for a shaman). hute.

he thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

to become thinner, to become finer. ishinapiprou.

to be afraid. koeteyoma.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). toshomo.

they left me on the banks of the Amiushiwe river, downstream. Amiushiwe u ha, koro u ha, yare kãi re kupariyowehei.

river name. Amiushiwe.

to break a piece of a round object by striking it. yareshe.

antepasado, hekura asociado a. yopena.

when the disease demons descend from the sky, a red light emerges from the chest of omãyãrithawe. omãyãrithawe ke pariki wake homoprou mi ha paoni, kama re pe ithoprou re tehe.

maleficent supernatural being of the yai the type associated with the rainbow. omãyãrithawe.

1. To seek balance by flapping wings (bird). 2. To spit repeatedly to spread a magical substance.. pahehou.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

the effect of the malefic substance. rahoprou.

to be completely torn apart, to be in shreds or rags. rehihiprawe.

to have swollen eyelids. mamokaki warepiai.

the eye opening reduces (due to swollen eyelids). mamokaki wãkereai.

eye, eyelid, orbit of the eye. mamokaki.

to put at a higher level (terminative). yuteheprou.

to help someone remember something. ahayepramai.

others climb the pijiguao palms using two crossed sticks. ai rasha si pe hami pe hãikãmou, kanaa peni.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikiãi.

the "Whites" never give nothing for nothing. nape ke peni no mai ha the pe hipei taomihe.

give nothing for nothing. taomihe.

koapi vines. koapi ãshithoku.

vines or climbing plants. ãshithoku.

bones. anjeros.

to be clear, bright (the sky, the day). hirahawe.

my ear is plugged. ya hiyokaki ka komãkema.

my ear is plugged. ka komãkema.

to cook several foods in water (perfective, plural object). arirarei.

null. maputupi.

do not group together (do not gather with each other). pe tishoshatihe.

do not group together. tishoshatihe.

to pluck a handful of leaves; to singe the hair of an animal before gutting it. hukukai.

he fell into the water and drowned. a ha keparuni a mishi tupariyoma.

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs and situations occurring in water or certain locations. pariyo.

they went away at dawn. tehe mi ukekou pe hurayoma.

to go away. ukekou.

to masturbate (man). pikukuo.

to feel unwell (terminative aspect). thareheprou.

to become sticky or viscous. yãrekãi.

to turn over momentarily. hatutou.

as soon as the turtle bit sharply into its throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

1. To drink, suck (breast). 2. To bite sharply (animal, snake); to cut, break off with a sharp bite; to make regular marks with the teeth. wawehea.

to wilt. ajarse.

I took the bow without the bowstring and walked leaning on it. hãto mãroko ya nahi re tereiwei, ya paihou kuaaherima.

to lean on a stick or bow while walking. paihirayou.

"little do we care that they built their house apart", we said. "pe the pe shaponomou ayao petao", yamaki kuma.

to build, repair or maintain a communal dwelling. shaponomou.

there the plants remained after the departure of the "Whites". kihi nape pe re perionowei pe yããpi hena heprariyoma.

to stay behind, to remain. hepramai.

that conuco is yours (yours and theirs). kahe wamaki hikaripi theka.

yours (plural). wamaki.

dig here. heha ke theka ta thapraa.

sit here. heha a ta roik u.

here (at the place where the speaker is located). thapraa.

I am a crown with the appearance of a harpy eagle and I pass before you. watoshe mohomi ya hayuai e.

harpy eagle. watoshe mohomi.

the tobacco is becoming moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to have become moldy (perfective). rohororayou.

we form a circle. mi hetutuai.

to form a circle. hetutuai.

speech of upriver. ashapama.

despite everything I slipped underneath the cut trees. kayapa hiki mohe re yoare hami ya hirerea he yatikema.

to slip, to slide underneath. hirere.

the mount Poapoa is high. poapoa maki her u w e.

high, elevated. poapoa.

(they) immobilized (him/her). mi hetuturei.

to immobilize a person by standing on each side and holding their arms. hetuturei.

the váquiros were approaching the place where we were ambushed. yamaki re reayoruawei ha ware ke pe ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

to be ambushed. reayoruawei.

temporarily vacant dwelling or camp. mathokowe.

to be lying on one. tutakikei.

pleasant smell of certain ripe fruits, smell of a half-roasted banana. riyeri.

He has stiff and stuck together hair. Uu shititiwe ama.

to have stiff and stuck together hair. shititiwe.

to split, to take out in several pieces. pashishai, dur.

to split, to cut superficially. pashishi.

to shiver, tremble with fever; to have convulsions. prisiprisimo.

they (both) answered twice. the kipi ã hua re porakarayouwei.

1. To be two who depart. 2. To perform the same action twice (only with an intransitive verb or in the middle voice).. porakarayou.

to be angry. rakiraki.

without knowing (that the dog had been killed) they laughed a lot as they went along. pe mohoti ha pruka pe ikãpraroimama.

to be unaware, uninformed, or indifferent. ikãpraroimama.

the children are not prudent. ihiru pe moyawe ma re mai.

to be prudent, vigilant, attentive; to be on guard. moyawe.

when felling an apia tree, I flattened the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

something that can be worked by hitting with a stick; to flatten by striking, to perform a task by hitting with a stick (e.g. washing a hammock by beating it to remove dirt, hitting a plant to extract fibers); flattened object as a result of being hit with a stick. yatika.

to fray, to become frayed. thauweshiai.

son, follow me closely. oãsi kamiye re rihami a nosi ta prakeiku.

follow closely. prakeiku.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small stakes planted around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to start protecting an object, dwelling or camp by building a fence around it (with palm leaves, branches or stakes planted in the ground). ithorokoprai.

he removed the bladed object with handle that he was wearing around his neck, and put it on the ground. haoa a re hayuprareiwei, a wai ha prakini.

an object with a handle or haft attached by being wedged into a split stick. haoama.

I will exterminate everything that lives in this region. ya the urihi si ahiaiwe.

I will exterminate everything that lives in this region. ahiaiwe.

those who sing saying yau kwã kwã kwã. ei ki re yaukuwemouwei.

song of the diostedé rabadilla dorada or piapoco bird. yau kwã kwã....

to give a fluid consistency to a drink during its preparation, to make a dye lighter. ereshiprai.

as Macagua was angry, they returned on their tracks. prereimariwe ke a hushuo the no wã ha, pe e he tatopariyoma.

they returned on their tracks, they went back. tatopariyoma.

everyone knows that in all the places I have gone, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco (by planting it in various places). nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma (mit.

to do something in various places. -amapotu.

straight, rectilinear; correct. shaririwe.

the people of the red partridges in turn rubbed the colorant with their fingers, and also painted the edges of their eyes and feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

to rub the skin with a finger or hand to apply a colorant. hãhihãhihãi.

Do you have your own knife. kahe wa siparapi si kua.

knife. cuchillo.

¿quiénes son (esos seres) colgando de la punta de los cabellos y que zumban. weti pei ke pe hethauku ora hami, weti wa the ki reãã wã perikiwe.

colgados en gran número (como personas en chorros). perikiwe.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yãnomãmi have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to pierce, to perforate, to inject. hiwehai.

to gather, to assemble. irikiprou.

to be bent, twisted (edge of an instrument). tishikiwe.

extend the head (to look). hiyãhãkei.

the breath of the Yanomami reaches us when the horãma birds sing. yãnomãmi pei the pe mishiã waroo horãma pe wãhai tehe.

breath, breathing; the vital breath. wãhai.

although the hekura goes towards you, if it does not intend to go where human beings live, it will turn its head away. y ãnomãmi the nape huu maopehe ha, ihi re a huimama ma kui, a mi re yaithatariyowei.

to turn one. yaithatariyowei.

to be completely hidden behind or underneath something (plural objects). he shãhoprawe.

to be imperfectly hidden behind or underneath something. shãhoã.

to have become white or clean locally. aushikei.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to make war. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to shoot arrows at each other, to make war, to be at war. niyãyou.

small pieces of wood used to start a fire when the ground is wet. wãna.

as he was waiting for them, he called them by whistling. pe no ha taikuni, pe husi heãmorayoma.

called them by whistling. heãmorayoma.

to be located irregularly, to arrange irregularly. parere.

me hicieron descansar otra vez en la desembocadura del camino. yo he haope ha yare kãi wãshimi horuu re kopeiwehei.

made me rest again. kopeiwehei.

(el recipiente que contiene) mis semillas kashuhuri está recubierto. kashuhuriye ke pe he yohoa kure.

covered things. yohoprawe.

furuncle. yuu.

furuncle. yuu.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I drove the point into the shaft and sat down next to the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to fall due to a blow, to scatter by hitting. tishishi.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiapraro.

to hurry back, to rush away for a short time. haiai.

to be afraid. kasihi.

he dyed the worked face of the bamboo tip with hosho u (perfumed annatto dye). hosho ke u peni rahaka a mi yãprãrema.

he painted/dyed. yãprãrema.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

to grow a little, to begin to grow (terminative form). preãkãprou.

fruit. ãhuh.

to be crowded locally. hithokoã.

help someone follow a trail correctly. katitimapou.

the state. he hohoto.

state. hohoto.

ellos tienen tubos huecos a lo largo de sus flancos, y una trompa en la prolongación de su garganta. pei orãmi ha horomato pe he tikea.

trompa (trunk). mato.

the shelters describe a circle. yãno pe tihiyeai.

Õmawe and his brother went around in a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they lived then downstream, there where the Orinoco goes under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

to describe a circle, to go around in a circle. tihiye.

tiny tick. shifeni.

the child is born. kurara akahi.

to be born. akahi.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the screaming piha bird (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

screaming piha bird (Lipaugus vociferans). fãifãiyomi.

to go ahead of someone. hetuamai.

to sharpen a point. hitotoai.

to slap repeatedly, to slap several times. paii.

bloodstained, bloody. iye.

bloody, bloodstained. iye.

the small stream of water becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to end abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horokokei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). eiwe.

to cause cramps. krimomai.

the day is going to rise (the speaker is in the house). the mi uhehepei.

to begin to rise (the speaker is in the house). uhehepei.

"let's confront each other with sticks", is that what you said. "yamaki ta wapayo", wamaki hoã ma ta kuu tado.

to confront each other with sticks or clubs. wapayorayou.

to loosen a knot or binding, to fasten loosely. prorokei.

tomorrow we will descend from the mountain and ambush at the edge of the path. henaha pemaki re yohooparekiriowei, pema yo nohi thaprai shoaope.

we will descend from the mountain and ambush at the edge of the path. yohooparekiriowei.

I don. wakokoami.

your teeth are so big (that I'm afraid). wa naki pata kuyehewemi (mit.

said of an object that is in such a state that it induces one to give up on it. kuyehemi.

to jump from an elevated place to another, to jump from one tree trunk to another. yutuprao.

to gather one. kohep.

to crush something by hitting it with the palm of the hand, to crush an insect in that way. paiai.

when you return home you will have hunger again. wamaki wãri ohei kookiriowei ke the.

to have hunger again. kookiriowei.

the moriche fruits turn slightly yellowish when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

slightly yellowish color that moriche fruits take when they start to ripen. okoroshi.

yono mosi: corn plant; Zea mays (Poaceae). yono mosi : bot. Pl. , planta de maíz; Zea mays (Poaceae). yono mosiki. Pl.

to make something warm, to reheat. yopramai.

knot in the wood. fhi moshoko.

knot. moshokore.

tying the feathering of an arrow (durative, plural object). shereka he okããi.

you (plural) will tie the feathering to the arrows. shereka ke wama pe he okããpe.

to tie the feathering of an arrow. shereka he okã.

dusty, covered in dust. hekrãpi.

who broke my arrow. wetini sherekaye a keprarema.

who. wetini.

(upriver speech) (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue): the man went in the company of the winged termites do not think that I possess magical dangerous plants (that I could use against you). ya ki nini thapoimi kutaeni (habla de río arriba.

magical or dangerous plants. nikererayomágica.

to be always talking. wã pakihi.

that's how I'm going to do it in turn. ei naha ya the ki thaa mi hetukei.

to do something in the same way, to do something in turn. hetukei.

to shorten something. homotopramai.

he prepared a tobacco wad and approached to offer it to Iewe. nahe ha yatakini iewe ke iha nahe hipeai ha ikuikuni.

tobacco. yatakini.

he would inhale a pinch of hallucinogenic snuff and pass his hands over the strings of the hammock. epena ke a re rishiãpraiwei, pei ke the pe peki hami imiki wai waroroataroma.

hallucinogenic snuff. rishirishi.

to let something become hardened like leather, to let something become deformed (through negligence). prihããi.

to be affected by a fungal infection causing itching and covering the body with sores. si ruru.

(He) is shaving with a knife. pe weshiki pata hoo.

to shave, shave oneself. ho.

he made the tortoise slide from above to below (and said): "bite my chin. fwatori ke a yohotamai piyeama: "pei, ware werina ta re ki mãyo taei huewetipari".

to slide something from above to below. huewetipari.

to feel fear (for oneself). nohi horihio.

to feel fear (for oneself). horihio.

to wear out a little. rurohoprou.

to be large, to have grown. yawewe.

the ancestors were not afraid to engage in unusual acts. pata the ki heonomi ta no totihiopereshini (mit.

not to hesitate, not to be afraid (to do unusual or strange things, to engage in extraordinary or surprising activities). totihiopereshini.

to leave something to become curved (perfective form). parokomarei.

to have a limb that suddenly emerges (out of the water). shorokoprakei.

fruits. mokaki.

Bat went to stick (along a tree trunk). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

said of the grains of certain grasses that get caught in cotton, fabric or leg hair. suti.

they brought the large baskets full of peppers near (the fire, to dry them). praki re pe thari pata titeteakemahe.

to bring near, to approximate (perfective, plural object). eteakei.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonamini poo a ha hokereni, moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

I found (picked up) an old arrow in the forest. urihi hami shereka hote ya hokerema.

to gather, to collect, to pick up. hokerema.

to tie, to bind, to fasten with a very tight knot or loop. prohohoprou.

He is like a son-in-law to me (lit. kama ke iha ya kahiki siyohamou.

to address someone using the term son-in-law, to be in this kinship relationship with someone. fkahiki siyohamou.

the inside of the canoe is slippery. kanawa a mi takre.

to be slippery inside. takre.

to dye or paint yellow, to make something with a yellowish color, to dye something with a yellowish annatto. frãihiprou.

they intend to go to war, but they lie (because they are cowards). ya naiki thao.

he will go in search of meat for his father-in-law. pe the pe shiipi naiki thao totihiope re.

(he) went in search of vegetables for himself and his family. ni thaokei.

to go in search of food with meat; to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. thaoprou.

he buried his nails in the top of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei (mit.

top of the skull. kepeiwei.

The anteater lay on its back to sleep. Oso hormiguero se echó de espaldas para dormir.

to lie on one. rekekeo.

to search for crabs by putting one's hand in their holes. oko hupai.

I'm going to search for crabs. oko ya pe wai ta hupaheri sho.

to touch a place after another. hupeatarai.

to transform into a chrysalis. si yomou.

to transform into a chrysalis. yomou.

to tell someone to swim. karemaparei.

we are so many that you will get tired of opening trunks to harvest us (say the Honeys). yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope (mit.

1. To open a hollow object to access the interior: to open a trunk to harvest honey or reach an animal that takes refuge inside, to open the shell of yuvías, to break a bone with marrow, etc. 2. To cut an animal into pieces. pasheai.

I am. mi hino.

to be. hino.

(Leptodactylus bolivianus frog). pukumari shi.

Leptodactylus bolivianus (a type of frog). pukumari.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

May the messenger of the feast arrive soon. teshomopi a koã ta haipo.

messenger. teshomopi.

to stop visiting (a person, a community). he tatotoo.

to stop visiting (a person, a community). tatotoo.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

to deform and become a viscous mass due to heat, as happens when burning plastic or certain resins (e.g. mai koko); to become very angry (and . yorikãi.

en ese lugar viviré, en ese lugar haré un círculo al caminar. ya ãhiki ka thai ha kuparuni, ya motoreo ta yaio.

1. Secador de droga o troja en forma de anillo, hecho o bien con una varita ﬂexible plegada para conformar un círculo, o bien con un bejuco grueso enrollado sobre sí mismo; un entretejido de bejucos ocupa el centro, mantiene la forma de la estructura y le sirve de soporte a lo que se pone a secar. 2. Objeto que los hekura hacen dar vueltas (como una honda).. motorema.

get up early to go kill an enemy (lit. pei waheki rãmi henarayou, waheki ha henarini poshe wãro wahe a niyaprarei.

early morning, dawn. henarini.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to stay behind when others leave; to constitute a remainder. heikikei.

the váquiros forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

to accompany someone by following them. yaumai.

Rabipelado threw his poisoned dart at Lizard at the moment when he (mounted on a tree) was working holding on only with his feet. refariwe ke a mi re kayahaaprarou tehe, nãroriwe a horama.

1. To hang and dangle in the void. 2. To be mounted on a tree, with the ankles tied with a vine ring, and let go of the hands to perform a task. kayaha.

to stagger, to stumble from weakness. rakiki.

they were divided, separated, moved away from the others definitively to live elsewhere. shekererariyo.

she was going from one side to the other and her laughter was always moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

to go from one place to another, not to stay still. buto.

to become flexible. uhurupiprou.

I drink water. mau ya u koai.

the beehive is really splendid, let's drink the honey (mixed with water). puu ke a topraa yaia, pema u ta koa.

if only I could drink fresh water. si ahi ya the u wãri ha koarini.

to drink regularly, to have the habit of drinking (a certain liquid), to drink several times in a row. koaprai.

to draw wavy lines. sinuo-.

with the chest covered with white down. oromashiki.

to conserve piled up, to conserve stacked. heruyutupou.

Horonãmi was lying unconscious. horonãmi re a kohipi praoma (mit.

to have lost consciousness, to faint, to be out of breath after a shock. kohipi.

my breath stopped coming out of my mouth and came out through my side. pei ya kahiki hami ya mishiãki kuprou mai, roroku hami re ya mishiãki pata preshesheprou ha shoaroni.

to move along the side of something, to move along the flank. rorokukei.

hermano mayor, sobre todo no vayas a ese lugar and also it can be The word 'wãri' in Yanomami means 'objects'. ãiwe miha a hehehewãri fuu kuikuhe (habla de río arriba. It is an Noun. ).

you (plural) will stop having hunger and also it can be The word 'wãri' in Yanomami means 'to smell, to perceive a smell'. wamaki wãri naiki mraape.

they always put on a bad face and also it can be The word 'wãri' in Yanomami means 'they are'. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

it's very small. wãri the.

hermano mayor. wãri.

my ear unblocked. ya yimikaki homoprariyoma.

the palm spathe opened (releasing the flowers). rasha ãthe homoprariyoma.

1. Explode, detonate, burst open; unblock (the ear). 2. Appear from behind clouds or mist (the sun). 3. Open lengthwise, split or tear open (palm spathe, banana leaf, etc.). 4. Germinate, sprout.. homoprou.

to smoke (in form of). weheroai.

the penis of Horemariwe penetrated under the ground. horemariwe moroshi si re pokeiwei.

to penetrate, to sink in. pokeiwei.

to arrive one after another. kupraai.

to make viscous or sticky. yãrekekei.

to start piercing or making holes (with a pointed object). hiroshoprai.

to put food to boil. yorumapei.

where is my axe. weti hami pooye koshi.

axe. pooye.

there, on the summit of the mountain I abandoned a deer. mihi, matotopiyei ha preãri ya prapei kuhe.

on the summit, on the ridge of the mountain. matotopiyei.

those who had gone to kill fish with their arrows in the river, returned to firm ground and gathered with us. yuri pe re niyai mi wereiwehei, pe hashirikei, pe warokei.

to be on firm ground (after having been in the water). wereiwehei.

I have intestinal worms. ya shiprupi.

small intestinal worms (unidentified (animal, plant)). shipru.

to sharpen, make sharp; to make rough or coarse. namomai.

they (the two of them) intend to attend (the cremation of the body) and will surely arrive late. ke kipi mamo niya ha shationi ke kipi huu hea ma re kui.

to observe, watch, attend. mamo shati.

upon arriving he stuck his machete (in a post). kama e siparapi shatia shoamapeheroma.

to stick or insert something upon arriving. shoamapeheroma.

put my parrot at the end of a stick. kihi thãriye a ta hiipari.

to place at the end/extremity. hiipari.

he fills up to. he iyeke.

to fill up to. iyeke.

to begin. thopokopiai.

yellow or brown in color. ashiashi.

the messenger of the party appeared suddenly in the dwelling saying: tu, tu, tu. tu, tu, tu.

to appear suddenly, to arrive abruptly. yaparayoma.

to curve an object, give it the shape of an arc. payokokei.

the two women sat slowly on the edge of the hammock, then one of them lay down against it. ke kipi re tipeariyouwei, yetu ai ke a re yakakeiwei.

to lie down, to recline. hohãthã.

the guayacan tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

guayacan tree; Tabebuia guayacan (Bignoniaceae). thomoro.

1. (verb intransitive) to shorten after repeated shocks, to become a member of a community (obsolete word); 2. (verb transitive) to fabricate a short bamboo arrowhead, to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (if damaged). theek.

pongámosle una rama con varias horquetas a nuestras flechas. rãhãrã pema ta hiima.

Rama con varias horquetas, utilizada como mezclador o como punta de flecha para matar pajaritos. yohorãki.

to split, divide, separate a part from a whole. shererekããi.

to be disappointed, to feel disappointment (due to a refusal in relation to a desired good). pokomo.

the others come out of the water quickly. yetu ai the pe hashir i o k e i.

they come out of the water, they set foot on land (from a canoe). hashiriokei.

the child simply deposited the tobacco quid on the ground. ihiru ani pee ke nahe praa re pekeheriiwei.

to deposit on the ground. pekeheriiwei.

when I kill a peccary, I carry it whole like that. kamiyeni ware ya pe pata ha niyaprani, ya pe pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

to carry a whole animal with its legs hanging down. tirororei.

cicada (unidentified animal or plant). yakor.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to tell one after another to do something. osiyemopraai.

plant vine cultivated. shokopi.

¿y si yo lo transvaso a otra olla. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to pour, to decant. heikei.

reduce cada vez más debido a la sequía. u thoo.

reduce. thoo-.

to make spin a cylindrical object several times. hamorimai.

to make roll or spin a cylindrical object. hamori.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei (mit.

1. Climb a tree by clinging to the trunk with both arms. 2. Surround, encircle; come to have a circular mark.. harukuai.

it is not big enough (what is said to excuse oneself when offering someone a small portion of meat). the etehemi.

to produce a weak or moderate sound. fwã hai etehemi.

to be small, not to be very big. etehewemi.

it was like enemy shamans had thrown something, I picked it up, it was a vine. hawe okã peni the sheyekemahe the ha kupraruni, ya the ha hokereni, thoo thotho kuoma.

it was like, it was as if. kupraruni.

the tortoise retracted its head (into its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

retracted its head (into its shell). totihipoti.

as they climbed a steep rock, Kasimi felt dizzy. pei maki ha pe ha yãmothoni, kasimi a shi kirihoma.

a young girl. kasimi.

to peel the yopo grains. hiprushai.

to widen, expand, extend (in surface area); to become wide (a hammock). hauhuai.

not to fear exposing oneself to arrows, to face someone with the challenge of fulfilling a threat (of shooting an arrow at the speaker). niyãprãmorãyou.

to have diminished, to have become small. sipirayou.

the man from Tayari destroyed the wasp nest by hitting it repeatedly with the palm of his hand. imikini tayari theri kopina pe re sheprarirahei.

to break, crush a round object by hitting it repeatedly with another object. sheprarirahei.

to lose one. shikopi.

before yesterday. fai the weya ha.

yesterday. fweya.

chancleta; Agenciosus inermis (Auchenipteridae). mokashito.

the váquiros are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were numerous rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothotho.

to begin to draw a curved line from one ear to the other across the forehead on someone. tiwaroprai.

The woman hung from a tree and, when the Tapir passed underneath, she kicked it. suweni a kahathorema (mit.

to pass underneath. pepihitou.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. fmomo.

to become locally flabby, wrinkled or soft (duration 2). wãpretou.

extender el brazo. kasheshetou.

I have the feeling that the pijiguao clusters will bloom in great number on the lower part of the trunk. yahatoto hami rasha pe no ikrekerayopi.

to produce many clusters on the lower part of the trunk (referring to the pijiguao palm). ikreke.

he was the only one there who had remained living in the collective house. iha re a hakokoa hea shoaa ma re kure.

to have been cut into pieces. hakokoa.

we slept during the night and then descended down the mountain (upon waking in the morning). yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descend down a slope. timii.

the ancestors became more and more numerous. porepore ke ki re parai totihionowei.

to spread, propagate; to intensify (pain). paraprou.

wait a moment, first I'm going to defecate. waiha, ya shi keyei pario.

to urinate. niaasi keyei.

to defecate, to lay eggs, to urinate, to fart. keyei.

she was very skilled at catching fish (funerary lament). prororiyoma ke a pata yaio.

a woman very skilled at catching fish in a collective fishing. prororiyoma.

richal. komokotore.

to clean one. wamore.

(when the child is born) I cut the umbilical cord and smear the outline of its mouth with blood, so that it will learn to speak quickly. pei ya shiki ha hãniprarini, shiki iyeni ya kahiki yaporemai, aka hayuprou totihiope.

to stir, agitate a liquid in a circular motion. aproko.

they (two) followed downstream the river of spells. heritha u ha ke kipi mi werema.

to go downstream, to descend a watercourse. werekei.

a complex verb composed of the iterative taa, the causative or permissive ma, and the perfective re, followed by a tense marker. In the presence of derived forms, modals or others characterized by the same phonological conditioning, taamare becomes taamari. taamare.

cuando ustedes limpien la parte del conuco invadida por la maleza, las espinas de la planta kãmoãrima los rasguñarán y chorrearán sangre. wamaki yasikope hami kãmoãrima peni wamaki i yepe rukekotii kukei.

part of a garden cleared of weeds. yasika.

to soften a bark. si uhutitiprai.

to make a liquid or powder completely homogeneous. uhutitim.

woodpecker with yellow beak. melanoleucos.

I'm going to take this woman as wife. ya amishi ta koo sho.

to take a wife. shatio.

Yoawe se sentó todo avergonzado. yoawe ke a wãri kirihiwe kãi re roonowei.

ustedes, los pusilánimes, no hagan el amor, déjenme hacerlo a mí solo. kirishiwe pe wãri, pe wãri kuwemotihe, yãmi ke ya ta kuwemo.

to be fearful or cowardly by nature (offensive). kirishiwe.

Iewe brought cassava (to offer upon arrival). ieweni nashi hiki re perakeherayouwei.

the place of the statement, or place of reference, is different from the place where the action takes place. fkeherayo.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, do not bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to rub, to slide along, to make an object fall out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikãi.

There were swampy areas over there (I saw them long ago). miha heãhãtu ke pe praa kurarei.

past tense, long ago. rarei.

to hesitate, not know what to do. weti nahamo.

he deposited the arrows on the ground suddenly. shereka ke ki re pratakeiwei.

to deposit or place something on the ground suddenly or with a quick motion. pratakeiwei.

we transported what remained of the váquiros on our backs. ware yama pe shee re yehihipouw e i.

we transported what remained of the váquiros on our backs. yehihipouw.

los cambures raparimi caen siempre unos tras otros (cuando están maduros). raparimi pe prerei siihehewe.

to fall one after another. prariri.

to start piling up tobacco leaves one on top of the other and making balls to keep them dry. ithoriprai.

to partially fill or empty (multiple objects), durative. hayaromai.

(after a detour) we fell in the middle of the path (that we had traveled before). pei yamaki mãyo poushoku ha yamaki fe re fakeiwei.

I stepped on a snake that was lying in the middle (of the path). oru ke ki praope ha ya ki poushoku re katikireiwei.

middle, center. fakeiwei.

symbolically during a search. yarori ke peni pei bólicamente durante una búsqueda. syn. sin. yãã heke iye pe wãri hami pe yãmoma (myth): the antepanaki hãrãru (who later were to become animals), painted their bodies with blood. yãã heke iye pe wãri hami pe yãmoma (mit.

the ancestors (who later became animals). antepanaki.

he hid his blowgun, which he left placed (on a rock) on the Mountain of the woman who is menstruating. makini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma (mit.

Mountain of the woman who is menstruating. Monte-de-la-mujerque-tiene-su-regla.

send your mother there to harvest corn, where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to emerge (elongated object). shorokai.

to peel a banana with the teeth. kuratha washeai.

to peel. washeai.

they put the tapir liver to cook. shama ãmo pe re tupeiwehei.

to have something cooking, to keep something cooking. tupou.

the penis penetrated the tender mokoroma leaves (on which the woman was sitting). mokoroma re hena tuku ha "toso.

a type of palm plant with short stems and large leaves, of the genus Geonoma. mokoroma.

to have rotted (terminative aspect). horepiprou.

quickly, rapidly. fai.

to acquire an oblong shape; to elongate a little. toroheprou.

the child is awake, he understands. ihiru a moyawe waikiwe.

to be conscious, awake, attentive to one. puhi moyawe.

to place in a hammock (an object, a person). periamai.

come children, stand in the central plaza. ihiru pe, pe ta hehãtaru, pei hapohe.

to stand in the central plaza. hehãtou.

to grow, develop a little (plant). tirerou.

crushed, extracted by striking. patikano.

to become scarce. resheshãprou.

hey kids, have fun, dance. ihiru pe, pe ta iriamohe.

have fun, dance. iriamohe.

when you are thirsty, you roll a leaf into a cone shape and thus collect the water from the trickle that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. oshokoremai.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe transformed. yetu ke e the ka wai ha weheti, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei (mit.

to narrow, to close (cavity, opening). wãtete.

we will take fire and pass the time warming ourselves. pemaki wake ha tereni pemaki pomotipe (mit.

to pass the time warming oneself. pomotipe.

a dispersal (of people, of communities). peindica.

he is my son. ihiruye ke a.

my son. ihiruye.

the load is hung too high (on the back). fthe yehio usutuwe.

to tie short, to fix, to hang something near the tying point, to shorten a too long carrying strap. usutuai.

I will not achieve it. the no topropimi.

to achieve, to accomplish. pimi.

1. Scream imitating the howler monkeys, to provoke their response and locate them (during a hunt). 2. Scream in pain; groan. 3. Scream collectively (during a ritual, or to welcome guests).. ereremou.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other (durative, plural object). mi wereheam ai.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other. wereheam.

to make round, spherical. komoreãmestible.

only some splinters were scattered on the ground. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to expand, to enlarge, to become extensive. praukuai.

small yellow, very sweet banana variety. ãsikerimi.

to be arched in a natural form. krehethewe.

the irokiri nope are all the time lying in their tiny vine hammocks. pei ke pe thoopi wai yai re kui irokiri ke nope ha wa pe shiro ta perihi thare (cha.

hammocks. tudinales.

caterpillar (unidentified (animal, plant)). fãsho.

to beautify, to make beautiful (perfective, declinational, inclusive). riyeherayou.

to possess a large number of specific objects. thethemapou.

pei. hurokopi.

I'm going to try. ya ta wapepraa sho.

to try, to test. wapepraa.

to drip (water). fhere warorai.

to drip, trickle (water). fhere.

a seed that is a potent hallucinogenic substance. nen un grano que es una potente sustancia alucinógena.

hallucinogenic. alucinógeno.

I throw the bee's excrement (the speaker is in a tree). pei ya shi hoyai kupe.

what are you doing there (at the water's edge). weti ke wa the rii thai kupe.

a multitude of fish. prarou kupe.

(auxiliary verb indicating epistemic modality). kupe.

pei. utasi.

those dangerous bamboo arrowheads of the shaishairami species, your quiver must still be crammed full of them. mihi shaishairami pe siki wayu totihiwe ta thare, the ki kaopou kore ke the.

to force in, to cram, to pack tightly. kiriri.

lentamente Danta pasó (del árbol donde estaba encaramada) a un yagrumo. kahu ke usi ha shama ke a pata opi re piyekeiwei (mit.

la tortuga pasó rápidamente (del suelo en donde se encontraba) a la pasarela (par atravesar el curso de agua). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass or have passed from one support to another, what habitually passes from one place to another. yeiku.

we carry cooked plantains on our backs. kuratha yama pe ripi re yehihiponowei.

cooked plantains. yehihiponowei.

to be. maanu.

to cover, to block. kanera.

cave or burrow. kotokewe.

justo encima de nosotros se encontraban dos gallinetas encaramadas una junto a la otra. pei yamaki hetupi ha hãshimo ke kipi he t i p e t e o m a.

las almas bailaron unas tras otras. porepore pe praiai mi hetuoma (mit.

one after another, in succession. hetupi.

"you are erring/missing the shots". "wama pe posi hore re waaprapiyekiri".

you are erring/missing the shots. waaprapiyekiri.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). thethei.

he smoothed the monkey's tail. wisha ke teshina hokokama.

younger brother, that shaman standing there will rub the arrows, and you will become a good hunter again. prake ha a re u p r aopariyowei, pusi ei ke ki re kui, ke ki re hokokoapareiwei.

to caress, to smooth (hair); to massage, to rub a sick person during a shamanic cure. hokokai.

to camp several days in the jungle to collect leaves for a roof. fhenaki wai.

to remain seated for a while. roprao.

to be a little black, to tend towards gray. ishihi.

I will not stay for a long time. ya no teteheaiwe.

I will not stay for a long time. teteheaiwe.

her daughter was truly pubescent: she had breasts. pe thee e pata totihiwe, a hãkãm i o m a.

to be forming breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). hãkãmii.

the m. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati (cha. was completely yellowed by the smoke. ).

to acquire reflections, to acquire this tonality locally, to dye or paint yellow, to dye something with a yellowish annatto, to have this tone locally, to have been painted locally with a yellowish color, or dirtied by smoke, to be completely painted or dyed a yellowish color, to have become completely yellowed by smoke. frãihiã.

The one who was beautiful was called Kuyarowe. katehe a re kuonowei, kuyarowe a wãhã kuoma.

Name given to Õmawe in the communities located south of the Orinoco River. kuyarowe.

1. to thicken (a liquid), to become slightly pasty; to soften a little, to become malleable 2. to thicken a liquid, to make it slightly pasty; to soften, to make malleable. yãhihi.

what noise is that. weti ke the horã.

noise, sound. horã.

daughter-in-law (wife of son, sister. thathe.

pronounce your personal name and also it can be The word 'wãhã' in Yanomami means 'personal name'. a wãhã ta yuo.

name. wãhã.

to eat something crunchy quickly (in a funny way). krãrikrãrimou.

to eat something crunchy quickly (in a funny way). krãrikrãrimou.

squirrel monkey, or titi monkey. esheeshemi.

poisoned. envenenado.

belongs to the taxonomic system of trees. nathohi.

later you will realize the consequences of your action. waiha wa no wai shihiroprarowe.

to put oneself in a situation that will have dire consequences. shihiroprarowe.

the nearby song of the paujiles is heard and also it can be The word 'paruri' in Yanomami means 'gallineta (type of bird)'. ei paruri ke pe miã pata ahetewe totihiwe.

paujil (bird species). paruri.

to be a little red, to be barely ripe. fwakehehe.

deception, pretense; to pretend; to carry out an activity. horehore : engaño, ﬁngir i , horashi, mi hora, yare, yoke miento; aparentar que; realizar una actividad.

deception, pretense. horehore.

he hurried as soon as night began to fall. pe the ka mi wai suprahatou tehe a wãri re horeprarouwei.

as night began to fall. horeprarouwei.

my mother. na*.

knot in the wood. hi moshoko.

knot. moshoko.

to do it quickly, to do it for a moment. wãkitai.

specific sound of a fart, expressed by the onomatopoeia ã f u. fshiã efumou.

to feel like farting. fshiã ihe.

fart that prolongs emitting a more or less high-pitched sound. fshiã kiyomou.

sound of a fart when the buttocks are wet. fshiã praririmou.

short and dry fart like a tongue click. fshiã tahamou.

fart. fshiã.

to pass suddenly from one support to another. piyeprakei.

Exclamation of surprise or amazement. poho!.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to habitually stay in the dwelling while others are busy outside. heikitou.

due to that I gave them a basket of tobacco is that now they are chewing. pee ya nahe komi yorehi ha hipekini, nahe kareai ma ta kurawe.

tobacco. nahe*.

the váquiros have straight and pointed ears. ware pe yimikaki hiyekewe.

to have open ears (insulting). fyimikaki sheshehewe.

ear. yimikaki.

¿dentro de cuántos días vas a ir a Mahekoto. weti naha the no ha kupraruni mahekoto hami wa hupe.

A place name. Mahekoto.

traigan aquí (en el lomo) una piel de tangará (de la especie h e h e h e m i) procedente de los Waika. waika hehehemi e siki ta yehimaparihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

tangará; Tangara sp. (Thraupidae). hehehemi.

The Yanomami exist. Yãnomãmi ohi.

to be, to exist. ohi.

to become hardened, deformed by heat. toreke.

the man had mixed/mingled into the dense group of winged termites. osheri ke pe yayomope hami yãnomãmi ke the re nikerepariyonowei.

he had mixed/mingled into the dense group. nikerepariyonowei.

to be knotted in various parts. motoreriwe.

I will not hit you. objemai ke the.

to hit, to strike. objemai.

Yoawe turned over again (in his hammock). Yoawe e mi hatuprou kooma.

to turn over, to roll over (in a hammock). hatuprou.

they did not grind the bones of the deceased, although they were fragmented (reduced to ashes). pei ishi pe kãi tikai mahei, oshohore ke ki ma kopehou totihio tehe.

to be fragmented, to be reduced to ashes. kopehou.

food that has been cooked in that manner. frãrãrãma no.

to cook directly over the flame. frãrãrãi.

to have developed multiple blisters on the hand. thorohorariyoma.

lay on belly (perfective). rehokei.

to fill or empty halfway. hayarokei.

to arch one. ipresi.

to become less concentrated, less thick. reherou.

(he) has hair that is too long. he potoshii.

to have hair that is too long, to the point that it covers the nape. potoshii.

banana. cambur.

Nosiriwe cried (for lack of tobacco). nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

In the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

Ancestor who spread tobacco. osiriwe.

blink repeatedly. misi rahorahomou.

blink repeatedly, close eyes several times in a row. rahorahomou.

pintar, teñir localmente. frãihimakei.

they slept during the night and felt good, they had already dreamed. titi ha pe ha mioni the pe totihorayoma, pe the pe maharimou waikioma.

to dream, to have a nightmare. maharimou.

poling a boat forward using long poles. paihiprawe.

they took a long time to find the case (that contained the feathers for adornment). yãkumi kanapo si tararemahe.

case. kanapo.

yo comprobé que el hielo realmente podía curar and also it can be The word 'tharei' in Yanomami means 'whole'. preyura ke peni pe the haromai totihio tharei.

this roll of fishing line is well filled. ei matiriawe pe pe pata shiko tharei.

they are not seen. pe the mãyo tapraimi ke a tharei.

really. tharei.

hacerse pintar por otro. onimamou.

1. Put, place behind. 2. Mount a child on the back to transport them. ãyoriãmai.

to hide an object behind another, to disguise, to conceal by interposing something. shãhoãi.

Brother, they approached. apa, pe re prakerihe ye.

they approached. prakerihe.

to be of a fragile or brittle nature. yerirou.

to thin out, to make thin. hepisamai.

but where has the centipede passed. weti hami kumãrãwe wa the ki ta kuroha ke.

denotes perplexity within a question. kuroha.

when Õmawe and Yoawe appeared, the monkeys got angry/upset. omawe ke kipi ha petariyoni hoashiri ke pe hushutariyoma.

they got angry/upset. hushutariyoma.

as they had exhausted the firewood, they climbed up rapidly one after the other to the posts that support the communal shelter roof. koã ãsho pe mi ha watherini rope pe tuoproma, totahima pe hami.

they climbed/scaled rapidly one after the other. tuoproma.

don't hit them (the bats, with your arrows) or the okã will come. pe he yoatihe, okã ke pe.

to hit on the head with a stick (a person, an animal), to strike with the end of an elongated object (stick or arrow), to hit flying animals with the end of one or several arrows. yoatihe.

I put a lid on the pot. hapoka ya si ka he k a h u a i.

He obstructed the cavity where Hairless Rabbit was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

to close, to cover an opening. kahum.

to separate the buttocks. horihi.

to shake a bamboo arrowhead laterally to remove it from the arrow shaft; to kill a man. hãwetãi.

speech of upriver. hiyãhã.

He died and his wife followed him in death; they were delousing themselves with a comb. hewethawe a nomai ha kuikuni, pe suwepi sho a no1 v.

to die, to lose consciousness, to be unconscious. wethawe.

tense bow. rahaka hetho.

bow. hetho.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani (mit.

shake (once). ripukai.

neck (more specifically). aharao.

to collect the hallucinogenic substance (lit. ayukuma yoai.

hallucinogenic substance. yorarutuni.

to masturbate. korikorimou.

speak without waiting. watete.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

the plant of the birds of prey occupies a wide surface. koikoimi henaki pata re upraa re yaweterakiri ye (cha.

to become spacious, to widen (a cavity, hollow, interior of an object). yawete.

to not eat everything, to not give everything. ithororesto.

in each occasion the ancestors let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

to let escape, to allow to flee, to facilitate escape. yashu.

to speak a language distinct from the local language. pashimo.

"little do we care that they built their house apart", we said. "pe the pe shaponomou ayao petao", yamaki kuma.

to build, repair or maintain a communal dwelling. shaponomou.

they cut manaka palm stems into spears very quickly. manaka si sherisheria re yaiapotayonowehei.

to do very quickly. fsherisheri.

do not sleep. pe miotihe.

I told them not to sleep. ya kutariyoma.

do not sleep. miotihe.

I don't have a quid of tobacco under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a quid of tobacco under the upper lip. hopou.

it is used to give assent and also it can be The word 'se' in Yanomami means 'it'. se usa para dar el asentimiento.

it is used. se.

to work in the fields/gardens. hikari-mou.

to cook directly over the fire (without hanging it). tirereapei.

I, and not the others. pefermo.

dark, obscure. weyata.

the souls arrived in a group at the dwelling, they really arrived like that. porepore ke pe warerou ha kuikiyoni, pe warerou ha yaiparuni.

to enter or exit in a compact mass composed of many elements, to penetrate in a group into a dwelling. warerou.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to start feeling sleepy. maharishiai.

after having camped in the forest he returned to live in the communal house. a kãi peria fa totihitaikuni, a kãi fa shaponoikuni.

to come to live in the communal house after having camped in the forest for a more or less long period. shaponokei.

to be stingy. shi ima.

to lift. empa-.

to fabricate an object whose surface is wide. thepahakei.

to modify the direction of a canoe by giving small lateral paddle strokes from the rear of the boat. hããmãi.

to be twisted in one way or another, to retain a lasting mark after having been bent (an arrow). ethethewe.

what does it matter if we remain alone, they will go hunting (lit. pei peheki yãmio peo, totori the pe taepe.

to be alone, to remain alone. yãmio.

to scatter the embers (for clearing land). yareshe (para realizar una quema de terreno).

to break into several pieces; to scatter the embers (for clearing land). yareshekei.

I was still walking on the path when night fell on me. pei yoka hami ya huu shoao tehe ya he ka komãrayoma.

night fell. komãrayou.

to truncate, amputate, cut off the tip. hemathaamai.

they ceased to exist (in different places). the pe maomopotuhe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

they ceased to exist (in different places). maomopotuhe.

to enlarge, to expand the surface of a dwelling or garden plot. hauhumap.

to show oneself, to appear, to be visible. mimou.

one of the five levels of the Yanomami cosmos. watawatawe.

to call out to them. areremo vb.

to call out to. areremo.

Horimawe has gone to sit on the path of the weyari, the healing trees will come to you. weyari pe no mãyo ha horimawe a roopariyoma horihori hiki niya re huope ye e.

healer that cures the sick. horimawe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). yereke.

(related word). prewe.

I was afraid and startled. ya ha kirinarumi ya ãtiprariyoma.

perfective form of many intransitive verbs; the perfective of the incoative of processes, certain actions (eating, leaving, speaking) or accidents (falling, shouting). prariyo.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). makukushimi.

(they two) dried out the water hole where Rahararitawe lived, and he, dying of thirst and crying, ran around because of them (looking for water). a no hete ha wehemaparini, rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama (mit.

to make dry, to dry out; to protect from rain. wehemai.

to give birth to a child. kuprou.

to be hungry. hokeke.

quédense tranquilos, no roben, no dejaré de prohibirles (que molesten a los demás). kiha ya wã no wasio kuyeheo mai ke the.

to do something. huritihehe.

no, I will not go out again. sipoo koo taomi.

to go out, to exit. sipoai.

each time he touched the two women, they were avoiding it. suwe ke kipi the wãri hore pakihiaprarope hami ke kipi hãroãpraroma.

they were avoiding it. hãroãpraroma.

to habitually offer (two prey). hãkohãi.

to receive, to obtain (two prey). hãkohopei.

to offer someone two prey from different animals. hãkohoãi.

to dry up (pond, lagoon). wellover.

to accompany a lone person, to help them. thãrimapou.

I used to dock at a place where the vegetation was sparse. u nokare wawepohori ha ya katioma.

place where vegetation is sparse. wawepohori.

we regrouped and plunged down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to fall or slide down a slope, to plunge into water. nihorokei.

los árboles horoeti son realmente muy frágiles, se rompen muy fácilmente. the hi noni ta yaitani, ihi re the hipe kreyou si ihehewe ta yaitani.

to become fragile. noniprou.

to make concave, to hollow out. hopokai.

come to look for us. wamare ta koreyo.

come to look for us. koreyo.

¡el soplo quemante de la diadema-avede-presa se despliega sobre nosotros. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

diadema-avede-presa. koimari.

she put the two gallinetas to cook, and then hung them. ha tupani, e kipi yaumakema.

she hung them. yaumakema.

to roll up completely, to enroll completely (perfective, plural object). wapurerarei.

it is far away. puhi no prahapi.

distant, far away. prahapi.

Follow the path. Noshi hari hi kuma.

to follow a path. noshi hari.

frog; Leptodactylus bolivianus (Leptodactylidae). prukumari.

went to the place where rises the Mount-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. re uprayahi ha, suwe ke the yipimoma.

rises. uprayahi.

he descended slowly. wapu ke pe ithãopisi a ithorayoma.

descended. ithorayoma.

to paint dots on someone. tipikiai.

while they were digging them up, they sang like toucans to make the sweet potatoes come out. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe, huko mo pe mayepimow a p u; tahiapi a ta hukepa, ya the ta wapa.

sweet potato drink. hukomo uku.

sweet potato. hukomo.

ticks. ki ha patakini, the pe rãtãrãtãprarou (mit. she puts on the ground the container that holds them and (you see them) swarming. ).

ticks. patakini.

the spirit will take possession of your mouth. poreni wa kahiki terei.

will take possession of. terei.

give that to the one who is lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

to install or be installed in the lower part of the roof, behind a dwelling or shelter; to hang one. shikão.

ay, our voices slip (= sink) under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

the turtle retracted its head (inside its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

to slip inside, to slip along, to slip through the hands, to sink. wahoa.

in a place where the ground was bulging, there were manaka palms. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha manaka si pe kuoma.

convex, rounded, bulging. yeprihiwe.

I have acid regurgitations. ya epreteãpi ni nashiwe.

to have acid regurgitations (in a lasting way). epreteãpi.

speaking a language slightly different from the one proper to the place where the speaker is located. kãhiã.

species of bamboo (unidentified). thora u siki.

we went into the water a little downriver. y amaki ithoa korohokema.

a little downriver. koroho.

to draw, to paint a circle on someone or something. oni rohahaai.

to draw, to paint a circle on someone or something. rohahaai.

something similar to the phosphorescence of fireflies has just come out. hawe amakuri ke ki wake re hetirihe (cha.

firefly, glow worm. purima.

retomen tierra firme dispersándose. pe ta hashirio rãikiomopotu.

dispersing; spreading out in different directions. rãikiomopotu.

they are occupied. pe yapekewe.

to be occupied in personal tasks. yapekewe.

to have oneself painted with transverse lines on the body. tiprutamou.

to marry a woman, to take a wife. fsuwe teai.

to take a woman, to marry a woman. fsuwe toai.

little brother, it is I who marries the woman, I will not let (another) take her. pusi, kamiyeni suwe ke ya thapou, ya teamai mai ke the.

to marry a woman, to take a wife. fsuwe.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

yãmonashi. yãmonashi.

el árbol de aguacate floreció por primera vez. ãhãi ke hi hapamou.

aguacate (avocado tree). ãhãi.

to widen (a cavity), to enlarge (a surface). hauhuamai.

ella cogió una hoja tierna de un árbol para coger batatas. huko mo co a coger ajíes; wapu re e kohi hena tuku ha huBot.

batata; Ipomoea batata (Convolvulaceae). huBot.

inaccessible den (gets lost under rocks or thick roots). wãripraai.

(the animal) aspirated (the blood) for a long time. a wai ukuukumotima.

aspirated (the blood) for a long time. ukuukumotima.

to sweep the floor. hãrãru.

object that can be worked by nibbling with the incisors. washishamou.

to crisscross logs or pieces of wood to sit on (and isolate oneself from the ground). parithaai.

horn. t.

horn. t.

buttocks. naldonde.

the otter had curled up in a place where the high part of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to curl up, to be curled up at the bottom of something. hikokei.

to begin to be isolated, to begin to be separated. yawereprai.

that which is yellow or brown (referring to the blue macaw and the red-rumped curassow, whose ventral feathers are brown, to distinguish them from the paruri, which has white ventral feathers). ashiashirimi.

that which is yellow or brown. -rimi.

"you will not be able to express yourself better after having taken the spicy drink, do not believe that". yãimoro wa u ha koani.

a small child. yãimoro.

to heal; to stop. yokeke.

to build several temporary shelters or several camps (at different times) in the same place. fyãno yarikamai.

to hit someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikai.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe pei e fama fuma.

Yoroporiwe went to visit them (the two) at their house. kama ke kipi iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

to visit. yoroporiwe.

I will not be able to find the path again. ya no wãri katitipropi mai ke.

to find the path again, to find the right direction again. katitiprou.

to pluck feathers from a bird; to singe the hair of an animal before gutting it. hukukurarei.

to dry by fire, to smoke. tetekou.

on the other side (of the hill or mountain). lofai the tiwaro ha.

on the other side (of a hill or mountain). lofai.

the sound of approaching rain is heard. maa ke a re titeteimai.

the sound of approaching rain. titeteimai.

we went among several to get the firewood we needed (to cook) the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

firewood. thariki.

to sin. herosiwe.

to fold the edge of an object several times. shãkomai.

to have those wavy lines traced on one. hukekamokei.

you are always whimpering. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to sob, to whimper. eheehemoti.

the pots are closed (by means of lids). hapoka si pe ka he kahuprawe.

closed (plural objects). kahuprawe.

he is angry. iwa kretepi hi.

to be angry. kretepi.

there where you are, near you. heweriwe a mimou shoa.

where you are. heweriwe.

to pleat (terminative). wãhiprou.

supernatural being associated with premonitory dreams. thapiriwe.

Stagnant water contained in natural holes with more or less vertical walls. shiokore u.

tree (unidentified). shiokore.

He/she speaks the upstream dialect. Ofe theri.

upstream (speech). ofe.

we have taken an abandoned path that passes by the river. hei ke yo tusi re ithopokiri ha pemaki kuparekirio.

abandoned path. kuparekirio.

he killed a tapir in the morning. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema.

you never kill any of them. wama the pe wãri niyaai ma re ma tharei.

to kill, to hunt. niyaa.

null. yokoshi.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

shallow water. makekewe.

it is claimed that the eyes of dolphins have power, they make women fall in love. tonina suwe ke iha pe mamo hoã wayu, pe nohiãmou.

to awaken friendship or love. nohiãmou.

he/she is dead. a waiyorayoma.

to be dead. waiyorayo.

I got a blister on my hand from the axe handle. hãyokoma pei hithoni ya imiki si poshoprariyoma.

handle. hithoni.

he penetrated her and copulated (lit. the mo wãri rukerani, a wãri wãekewãekemoma.

he copulated (lit.: he agitated). wãekewãekemoma.

to grow (a human being, an animal). yawe.

overgrown (especially a conuco or path). yasikou.

batara mayor. Taraba.

to have sinusoidal lines, made with the nails on a colored background, painted on the chest. tikekeo.

to mix, stir, blend. tikura.

in the moment when they took down the hammock of Miel. yãmonãmãriwe peki kushaihe ha.

they took down. kushaihe.

the ancestors transformed into sloths. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

they transformed into sloths. ihamarariyoma.

small bird. yimikaki seserewe.

bird. seserewe.

Move in a line (and silently), like the chachalas. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

1. To line up, align. 2. To tighten (by aligning well) the straw strands of a basket. shaniniãi.

(they) have hung hammocks in the open air, several people. hakokoprawe, pl.

have hung (hammock). hakokoprawe.

The woman took two bananas at once, one for her and one for her child. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru oshe pe ma kui riha.

to take, give or receive two objects at once. uãi.

you and I are going to live together. kamiye ke yafeki yaiprariyo.

1. To live together (for relatives who have a mashi relationship). 2. To get lost.. yairu.

we went into the water a little downstream. y amaki ithoa korohokema.

a little downstream. korohokema.

to be about to have transverse lines painted on one. tiprutupramou.

Titiri was perched on a branch inclined towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma.

inclined, bent. ithoreope.

to habitually give many gifts to the same person. prukaaprai.

to become smooth and moist (perfective of the inchoative). frakaharayou.

if they kill a big fat tapir near the lagoon, you will go to the conuco to look for plantains to accompany it. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe a wãri wawewawe praope ha kuratha wamaki ha toararini wama a tehiape.

lagoon, pond, marsh, etc.. tehiape.

to produce shavings. akaweshiamai.

the attribute of the hekura (rihu u) was about to come to me, but since I did not stay still, it went back. rihu uni ya nape mori ithou he yatiokirioma, kamiye ke ya he ha reshiproni a he tatokema.

to move around, to be occupied in various places at once. reshii.

to release a person who has been restrained to prevent them from committing acts of violence, once they have calmed down. huhuraprarei.

give me the object that contains my hallucinogenic substance. miha epenaye ke ki pehi kãi ta hiyo.

object that contains a hallucinogenic substance. epenaye.

go get some water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

I scoop out the banana compote that is in the pot with a gourd. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

to extract, to remove using a utensil (gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikekei.

the pijiguaos have many bunches everywhere. rasha pe ikreheprawe.

the pijiguaos (a type of palm tree) have many bunches everywhere. ikreheprawe.

the knot of the bowstring slid off its fastening point (and came loose). pe nahitha moroshi ikukuprariyoma.

to slide off, to come loose (of a knot or fastening). ikukuprariyoma.

the great worms devoured the woman's entrails; when she was emptied, she died and also it can be The word 'ãsi' in Yanomami means 'soft, tender, flexible'. poreriyoma horema ke peni the ãmoku mi watheaprai kupariyoma, pe the ãsiri misi rukei no kureshi.

to be soft, to offer little resistance to pressure; to be porous; to be deflated. ãsi.

it was Nosiriwe who diffused the tobacco. nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma.

diffused, propagated. paraamapotayoma.

hand. imiki.

they are many, standing one next to the other, with their heads covered in white down. pe he horoi yorukuwe (mit.

to stand in large numbers close together, forming a compact mass. yorukuwe.

jo, let me descend (from your back). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit.

to make descend, to let descend (someone one is carrying). ithomarei.

the nutria had curled up in the bottom of a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã waikirayoherima.

to be curled up in a compact mass; to coil up along. ikinirayou.

voy a amasar los frutos del seje y a diluir la pulpa en agua. hoko ya mau yaruai.

cuñado, he aquí que (los hekura) te puriﬁcan (mediante un líquido). pei ke, shori, wa yaruu ke a kupohei.

to begin, to start. yarukei.

if they come to visit us, I will hide the pot in the forest. pe hamamou ha urihi hami hapoka ya si hithekei.

to hide, to conceal. thekei.

to make love (said by a man). nihoronihoromo.

our relations in the past were friendly and I don't stop thinking that they still are. yaheki rimimayou parioma, yaheki nohimayou tao ya puhi kuuwei ke the.

to have good relations with someone, to be friends with someone. rimi.

the elders will bring axes. pata peni hãyokoma pe popehe.

they will bring. popehe.

come little one (son-in-law), you will lick my fingers (after I have harvested honey). hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape (mit.

to employ this kinship term to address someone younger than oneself, to be with someone in that kinship relationship. pusimou.

in the place where there is a very small conuco, an enormous cluster hangs from a palm that has the base twisted. hei the re patirahari hami, si koro re toyekere ha si hami, ei ke ki pata.

twisted at the base. toyekere.

to feel headaches after having walked a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : the path has shaken previously). ).

1. to vibrate, experience small shakes; to sway 2. to tap with the hand, prepare a hallucinogen by tapping a leaf on which the powder rests, in order to separate the coarse particles from the fine ones. tiriki.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini (mit.

to divide something into pieces by pulling with the teeth in one direction and with the fingers in the other. wakoka.

(to have) a father-in-law/son-in-law relationship with someone. kahiki hekamamou.

to have a father-in-law/son-in-law relationship with someone. hekamamou.

to lift an object by taking it from one side. hokeprai.

(they) were putting the Yanomami far away. yãnomãmi ke the ki payeketaa waikikema.

to put something somewhere (durative, plural object). payomai.

Hormiguero stopped being sleepy and woke up. teperiwe ke a wãri maharishi mrai ha kuparuni, a hokeprariyoma.

to be woken up, to be disturbed during sleep (not having slept enough). fmaharishi waiyou.

to have a strong desire to sleep. fmaharishi preprou.

to stop having sleepiness, to wake up. fmaharishi.

don't be afraid. kirihotihehe.

don. kirihotihehe.

to give strength to a person (by feeding them well); to make harden. hiyakaamai.

to hold in place with the foot. katetepou.

to slap each other, to confront each other by slapping on the chest or side. paiyou.

by means of what. weti hami the re kuini.

by means of what?. ¿mediante.

only some were able to get out of the water quickly. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

1. to get out of a canoe, to set foot on land, to get out of the water; 2. to carry several objects from a canoe or water to land. washiri.

I am the Spider-Spirit hanging upside down (on the web). hãhãrãmãethawe ya ihohoa kuyahi (cha.

generic term: designates all web-spinning spiders. hãhã.

the load is hung too high (on the back). fthe yehio usutuwe.

to tie short, to fix, to hang something near the tying point, to shorten a too long carrying strap. usutuai.

on the face of the old woman they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. suwe ke the pata mamo kasi wãri oniprai ha yairoheni.

they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. yairoheni.

to be about to close the mouth. sutitou.

I cannot walk fast when the pain in my thigh becomes more intense. naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

intermittent pain, pain that becomes more intense at times. poruporumou.

to obstruct, the fish. ka komãtaai.

when she arrived she sat in the hammock near her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

it's far upriver. the prahapohori.

are you all going to probe the hole (up there). wama hipai re waikipohori. It's still inside. iha re a wãri peria shoaa kupohori (mit.

up, above, on top. kupohori.

probably the herd of tapirs is not very far away. ware keki aheare ke the.

to be close. ahea.

Follow me. Nosi yuai pe kuma.

to accompany, to follow someone. nosi yuai.

the carrying strap stretches downwards. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downwards, to become distended downwards (due to weight or force). prakukai.

to discover something while walking. fpomikeherii.

to make float. potamai.

we went around a hill. yamaki re kutapareyoruuwei.

we went around a hill. kutapareyoruuwei.

village of maleficent supernatural beings, associated with steep riverbanks. They can take possession of the pei mi ãmo (soul) of humans. weyoweyori.

of no use to you to be agitated: you will not return to that region (= you will be killed) (feigned threat during a presentation dance). wa kuaai ma kui, urihi wa kapai koomi.

of no use to you to be agitated. wa kuaai ma kui.

to have a floury consistency. hotetiprou.

and if I transfer it to another pot. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to transfer, to decant. heikini?.

place in the water where the rahara monster lives. rahara ki no poupi.

place where there are many tembladores (fish). yahetipa no poupi.

place in the water where certain animals live in abundance. poupi.

to take possession of a woman without the consent of her parents; to tell a community to take possession of a woman. tushuai.

introduce by force. kirirãi.

you used to come back with your back bent from the weight of the food you brought. wa ki niipi kãi hute terekeprou tharei.

it is said that the feline died suddenly while it was still standing. ira a terekeo shoao tehe a wãhã nomarayom a.

to be crouched or bent over while moving forward. terekekei.

the Yanomami will never stop sniffing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

to renounce, to stop doing. onoope.

shadow; the double of a person. ani-.

kumãrãroriwe: mythological ancestor, he taught the jaguar the art of moving silently. kumãrãroriwe: antepasado mitológico, le enseñó al jaguar el arte de desplazarse silenciosamente.

centipede. kumãrãwe.

to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. fni thopokopi.

a type of palm tree. coroba.

to eat someone completely. hubiepoakei.

I really wanted to break your ribs (with the back of an axe). pe repokosi mori sheai re a ma kui.

they went to this place to open the rua fruit shells (by hitting them to extract the almonds). rua mo sheai re kukeyoruuwei (mit.

to hit in a specific place; to break spherical objects by hitting them with a hard object, to break fruits in this way with a stick or stone. sheai.

pulsar, batir regularmente (como un corazón); sentir punzadas. yokoyokomou.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

to chew, masticate (durative). wãshikãi.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

to dominate in size, be larger than. moroko.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to drop something perpendicularly. nihorotamarei.

to become enemies, to start having hostile relations. napeprou.

to have the habit of staying at home when others leave. hetahetamou.

Tucán flew towards the broken liana that was still swaying, and clung to it. thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepiritha we a yei re notioimi, thotho yãteyãtemou shoao tehe a yeteprapariyoma.

to sway, to swing, to rock. yãte.

you have to sleep in a dirty hammock. yii ke ki tepepishi ha a perio.

to get dirty, to be dirty from dirt or smoke. tepepishiai.

to do it several times, to print several hands. raikai.

maracaná bird, Ara severa (Psittacidae). erekeerekemi.

the night surprised them, and the noises of the darkness were heard. yetu ke the pe he itututou ha yaironi, titiri pe heã kuprou shoarayoma.

to be surprised by night. itututou.

sweet. mihitati.

tree. kosihi.

to darken (terminative). ruweprou.

to separate from one. yokaai.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the váquiros dispersed. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

to have dispersed, to have scattered. yorãyou.

to give, to offer; to entrust an object to someone. hipe.

the fruit of the rerokotorawe akasihi tree. rerokotorawe akasi.

taxonomic classifier. akasihi.

Yoawe se sentó todo avergonzado. yoawe ke a wãri kirihiwe kãi re roonowei.

ustedes, los pusilánimes, no hagan el amor, déjenme hacerlo a mí solo. kirishiwe pe wãri, pe wãri kuwemotihe, yãmi ke ya ta kuwemo.

to be fearful or cowardly by nature (offensive). kirishiwe.

move away, my little one. oãsi, a ta payekeiku.

move away, separate, put at a suitable distance. payekeiku.

to sprout from the ground. maturipiai.

face. mamoku.

to rub with the fingertips to clean. horoko.

The giant Spirit-cachicamo looks at us with the corner of his eye. wakariwe mamo re repotaruhe ye.

to look with the corner of the eye. repokei.

to be skilled in the art of wayamou, to have eloquence. karehe.

he remained standing in the central plaza. fhehã hami a upraoma.

central plaza. fhehã.

the dwelling of Yotenama had fallen silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

to have fallen silent, to no longer emit any sound. eemoimi.

they made a crunching noise as they walked on the dead leaves. the pe shurushurupraroma.

to make a crunching noise while walking on dead leaves or dense vegetation. shurushurupraroma.

colorless liquid that oozes from a wound. nionio.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, to break or grab. yãmoniãi.

I intend to get this plant. ya henaki niya teatayo.

to take, to get, to obtain. teatayo.

to have a new sprout, to have new growing feathers (still partially in their sheath). shiputukupi.

I have just eliminated the pathogenic principle. ya the ki wayu hoyaaparei ke a k u h e.

eliminate. hoyaaparei.

to shell corn. fyono hushishai.

to crumble, to pulverize with the fingers, to crumble inside the hand. fyono.

he smoothed quickly the foot of the horoeti tree. horoeti re hi pata koro re tãihitamarini.

to smooth several objects. tãihirei.

the spider monkeys move along the branches of the horoweti trees. horoweti hiki poko hami pasho ke pe imima.

they move, they displace themselves. imima.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to be reddish. teãyãwe.

quickly, rapidly. fai.

to bite each other mutually (children during a game or a fight, lovers). wetiyou.

he suddenly put his hand on the drooping leaves. henaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to put the hand suddenly on something. wariprakema.

those who did not commit incest. the pe shi re katehei ke the pe.

those who did not commit incest. katehei.

they went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one they had arrived by (so as not to attract with the noise a wild animal that was pursuing them). the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to exceed (in quantity, in length), to go beyond (a limit), to leave behind. toremai.

low. yahatoto.

he has killed repeatedly. a wãri ishooprou re kupiyei.

to attack or kill repeatedly. ishooprou.

I am hungry. ya wãri oﬁ.

to complain of hunger. fohi hi pe ha the pe ohotamomai tehe.

to be hungry. ohotamoro.

will he start to smile finally. pe kasi watea ke a ta kuhani.

to smile. kuhani.

he is angry. paitanari ãhi.

to be angry. paitanari.

Rabipelado slipped away among the trees because he wanted to flee. nãroriwe hii ke hi pe hami a wãri hiririaproma, a niya ha tokuni (mit.

to slip away. hiririaproma.

to get scratched by someone (using an object); if hikekekei, perf. of if ikekeo. hikekamou.

to go around one after the other. hãropraai.

to rise up momentarily, to rise up for a moment. isitou.

to squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to extract the juice of a fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held in the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. ãhuhu.

the two demiurgs learned to make dangerous bamboo tips. prai re kupariyonowei.

hurry to go down. pe ithoai ta haitaru.

learned to make, transformed into, hurried to do something, passed quickly to another state. tariyo.

to slide the hair between the fingers to remove lice, pulling gently. fnoma ikokai.

to kill lice with the teeth. fnoma oai.

to sharpen two utensils by rubbing blade against blade. namo yakekeai.

to remove lice. fnoma.

and told what had happened to the one fulfilling his marital service. a re siyohamouwei ke iha a wã hai shoaom a.

told what had happened to the one fulfilling his marital service. siyohamouwei.

the two demiurgos did not go beyond Ruako, their footprints reach only up to there. ruako hami omawe ke kipi mayo he tatou kupiyei.

a place name or location. Ruako.

to be decorated with a series of short parallel lines, like the drawings on the body of a kasha husi caterpillar. parotowe.

he was on guard and watching if the tree trembled (lit. the hi tiikou mima.

to fill up to the brim. hiekekei.

to buzz. terere.

breaking a piece off a round object by striking it with the edge of the hand and pressing down. yareyando.

each time the husband left to hunt, Siroromi arrived in his absence. yamare wãri yimiraimi yaiwe tharomi a kotããi yaimou heama.

she arrived. tharomi.

the feathers of the crested curassow surround the base of its spear points, observe them well. pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

to surround, to go around. okoro.

null. ihete ke mamisiki hami.

to stand on tiptoe. hitesheai.

we will shoot arrows at the dead jaguar (to weaken or kill it). komi peni ira pemaki nomawe niyape mishiã* hawe.

to weaken or kill someone. mishiã*.

to have been partially rolled up, to have been rolled up at the edge. wapureakei.

they burn one after another. pe ishioprou.

to burn repeatedly, to burn one after another. ishio.

to group together, gather, join. yototo.

his liver fell to the ground, he lost his liver. pitha hami kama ke the amoku kea shoarayoma, kama amoku hoyarayoma.

to predict that an object will be lost. hoyarayou.

you, you always lie. kahe wa horemou no motai.

don't lie. wa horemope thai.

lie, deceive, pretend. horemope.

barely perceptible discontinuous movement that manifests on the surface, such as the slight trembling of debris on the water surface or the wriggling of larvae on the surface. hipihipipraro.

they had put themselves one next to the other and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to put oneself for a moment next to the other, to decide to put oneself like that. thãriritou.

to make love (said by a man). erimo.

to hunt. waika.

central space or plaza in the open air. hehã.

to paint crossed lines on the body, to have painted crosses on the body. yãhirim.

as Amoãyoma wants to go under it, the leaves of the song tree embellish it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro, pei ke hena noshi re hariape ye.

embellish. hariape.

community divided into two groups, whose members reside in two dwellings very close to each other. fperio poakao.

to clean or polish (multiple objects) completely. shutukaherarei.

the son-in-law left first, and his father-in-law followed him. pe hekamapi e re pariprariyonowei, pe shii e re nohãã shoakenowei.

followed. shoakenowei.

to be partially hardened or deformed. deprithothorayou.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

destroy, damage. wãriãrei.

ant. Camponotus.

mother, it is because the váquiros kept me in the center (of the herd) that my body emanates a pleasant smell. nape, ware ke kini ware ha mi ãmomapoheni ya ni kreteri hai ke a tharei.

to keep someone in the center of a group. ãmopou.

to have placed long objects next to each other (perfective of wariripou). waririmarei.

I fish in one place, then another. yuri ya pe kããtarai.

to fish in one place, then another. kããtarai.

to become purulent. niyokei.

brother-in-law, when they move they seem to be as robust as you. shori, ei kahe ke wa wãri mimou re kure naha the pe kãi rohothoaprarouhe.

to be firm, strong; old, elderly. rohothoa.

soft egg in formation. fnathe nanapi.

egg yolk. fnathe shãhe.

egg. fnathe.

to make noise while walking. shurushuru.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). arererayou.

to mash and knead cambures (fruits) with a stick with a forked end, agitating it up and down. tiprokoprai.

to mash, to pound (e.g. fruits with a stick). tiroko.

he has constructed his temporary shelter along the path of Siroromi. siroromi a no mayo hayuope ha a peria ha reparuni.

to construct a temporary shelter along the path. hayuope.

to eat. kuu.

to receive many objects from the same person. prukapei.

to look with the corner of the eye. ashekei.

palms (plural of shitipa). shitipa siki.

to fire several shots one after the other. thoothoomou.

animal of prey, game animal. maka-.

(they) attack someone. nape rurooprou.

to attack someone without valid reason. rurooprou.

we have passed the path where our enemies could walk (lit. pei ke yo nohimou mai pema yo nohãmipramarei ma re kuhe ke.

to pass, to leave behind. nohãmipramarei.

to imitate, parody, mimic someone; to measure (the length of something), evaluate (a quantity), count. owekei.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekai.

send your mother there to harvest corn, there where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to have a limb that appears for an instant (out of the water). shorokorayou.

to trace a circle, to spin. shimoreãi.

I provoked the return of the hekura. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

to provoke the return, to oblige to retrace one. tatomarei.

The ãiãmo hena(ki) plant is dried and its leaves are pulverized, then the powder is inhaled, either alone or mixed, as a hallucinogen. ãiãmo hena(ki).

Justicia sp. (Acanthaceae), a cultivated plant. ãiãmo hena(ki).

to grab with the mouth or snout. weihou.

to have clenched teeth. wãsinio.

he went back at dawn. the mi ha haruruni the wãri koã henarayoherima.

at dawn, early morning. haruruni.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another people. ashiki.

he felt bliss and sat at the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

to feel completely well, to feel satisfaction or bliss, to be happy. tohihita.

to make groan. rããmomai.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit. keshetou.

to be in a hurry. wayumo.

the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the water surface. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma.

to appear briefly on the surface, to execute a regular up and down movement on the water surface. pokepokemou.

dry, smoked. tetekea.

give me a bamboo arrowhead, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to offer, to give. hiipa.

hermano mayor, sobre todo no vayas a ese lugar and also it can be The word 'wãri' in Yanomami means 'objects'. ãiwe miha a hehehewãri fuu kuikuhe (habla de río arriba. It is an Noun. ).

you (plural) will stop having hunger and also it can be The word 'wãri' in Yanomami means 'to smell, to perceive a smell'. wamaki wãri naiki mraape.

they always put on a bad face and also it can be The word 'wãri' in Yanomami means 'they are'. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

it's very small. wãri the.

hermano mayor. wãri.

partially empty dwelling (whose inhabitants left to work outside). yãno a prokotao.

partially empty. prokotao.

work in your turn. a ohotamo mi ta hetuiku.

wake up in your turn. a ta rãã mi hetuiku.

in turn, in one. hetuwe.

they fabricated totumas because they intended to consume pijiguaos softened in water on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

they fabricated totumas (containers) to consume pijiguaos (fruits) softened in water on the way. kopemamahe.

I vomited without realizing (the speaker is under the effect of a hallucinogen). ya suhai hãthoo no kupereshi.

without realizing. suhai.

at dawn he killed a tapir. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema.

at dawn, early morning. henararema.

fire located in the hetu misi (celestial disc where souls live); it is guarded by a being of repulsive ugliness called Watawatawe. There the souls of the greedy go to be consumed. shotari.

mythological ancestor who participated in the theft of fire from Baba. kanaporomi.

what does that one whose hearth is over there do. weti ke the thai.

—¿quién está ahí. —weti ke wa.

what smell do you have. weti naha ke wa ni kuaai.

what quantity. weti naha kuwe.

what does. weti.

property of the hekura. ala.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short log. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to roll up a leaf into a cone shape. oshokore.

to become as big as, to become equal to (in quantity, in height); to align; to cut (elongated objects) maintaining the same length (or the same height); to equalize quantities, values. usuku.

to make war. ãtãri ãhi.

when you are thirsty, you roll up a funnel-shaped leaf and collect the water from the stream that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

funnel-shaped leaf (for putting something inside). yotãyotãmope.

to start having stomach cramps. kriiprou.

go get water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

I scoop it out with a gourd. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

to be able to be extracted or removed using a utensil (gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikeamamou.

to have the smell of rotting meat or fish; to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. fni thopokopi.

to have the smell of rotting meat or fish; to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. thopokopi.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). huore.

to chat, converse, exchange news in the course of a ceremonial dialogue. ãikãyou.

to tear or rip longitudinally (terminative form). sheririprou.

to have become extensive, to have expanded. praukurayou.

What relation of kinship do you have with my younger brother, to whom I give shelter. kihi feesheye ya nohi re thaapraiwei iha, weti naha wa e kuu totihia kurawe.

my younger male relative, my younger brother. eesheye.

he fell ill far from home (due to my manipulations). totoprai.

when there is nothing to eat one does not have much desire to work (lit. enaha re sipe oheprou kuo totihio, the pe ohotamapou ma re mai.

to forget to feed, to leave without appetite to work. ohemarei.

to provoke fatigue, to fatigue. motamarei.

to smell, to sniff, to snoop. ãkukuãi.

ser ganchudo; estar enrollado sobre sí mismo. mi kuyuhuwe.

ser ganchudo; estar enrollado sobre sí mismo. mi kuyuhuwe.

the woman remained (in the tree). suwe ke the tikea shi wãriã ha yaiaruni.

to remain in a state, to not cease. yaiaruni.

the cassava plants fell off detaching from the root. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

to fall off, to become detached from the root. poru.

to grow, to mature, to ripen. hãmo.

he was wearing blue cotinga feather earrings. heimi siki reikimapoma.

to put/place in a suspended state in the void. reikikei.

they renounced wanting to kill them. mãrãshi ya pe nape hashirionomi.

to renounce wanting to kill someone. hashirionomi.

a splendid woman danced on the sand. uwe ke a no aipi tirereoma, mrakatahu ke a ha.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksand attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

sand. mraka.

if I get at least one, I will stop complaining, I will act as if nothing happened. mori totihiwe ke ya yuape, ya nakou kotãope mai.

one, singular. kotãope.

to have been painted by someone. tipikamokei.

to fall ill one after another. hariritaai.

expression referring to chachalacas (lit: those that rub with colorant). hei ki re hirikope.

expression referring to the habit of chachalacas (a type of bird) to roll in mud. hirikope.

small hairy caterpillar whose hairs cause itching. shiema.

the wood is dry. koã ãsho washitiwe.

to be completely dry, to stop being flooded (terrain). washitiwe.

to make several objects narrow. fmakosimai.

(he/she/it) frightens/terrifies someone. t ãmoku keaamai.

to frighten, to terrify someone; to leave someone stunned. keaamai.

father-in-law, make the bee droppings fall (multiple times). shoape, pei aruku ta kemarari.

to perform or cause to perform an activity that affects multiple objects. marare.

I didn't go down from the canoe to hunt doves on the shore. pe nape kupas.

to go down from the canoe to hunt doves on the shore. kupas?.

to be angry. rekuku.

1. hitikiprai : 1. To crush termites and stir them using a forked branch that is rolled between the palms of the hands. Aplastar cambures y removerlos utilizando una rama con horquetas múltiples que se rueda entre la palma de las manos.

to crush and stir. hitikiprai.

obtuve (pedí) un paquete de onoto de los Shamathari. shamathari pe rii ha nana ya hãro nakarema.

onoto (red dye). nakarema.

to immobilize a person by holding their arms against their body (to prevent them from committing an act of violence). yokokorei.

(synonym verb). yashishi-.

I'm going to establish my conuco upriver. ora ha ke ya rii hikarimorãyou.

to establish a conuco (agricultural plot) upriver. hikarimorãyou.

they already have all their noses broken. the pe hiyoka si hetitia waikirariyouwei.

to have a broken nose. hetitia.

be content with being informed. a yimika nohi wãri thapou ta pera (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to make known, to inform. yimika thamai.

repair. arre-.

to shake or rub one. yaisiprou.

he is always making love. shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. opraroimi.

I eat. wã hemi.

to eat. hemi.

to soften (certain substances, certain fruits). prehepirayou.

(speech from upriver). ﬁya.

to hunt. waiki.

my daughter, who are you in love with. oãsi weti sho waheki nohimayou.

to be in a friendship relationship with someone, to love a person; to have a romantic relationship with someone. nohimou.

¡ay, fui mordido por una mapanare. aroami keki wãrini yare si wetia yaire hai ke.

mapanare, venomous snake; Bothrops atrox (Viperidae). yaire.

to be twisted at a single point. torokoprou.

there are many trails that do not lead anywhere. the pe mayo he pruka tatoa kurai.

trail, path. tatoa.

they killed a large fat tapir near a lagoon. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, wawewawe praope ha.

lagoon, pond, marsh. wawewawe.

to begin to paint round spots on one. tipikipramou.

cubierto de neblina. hukosi.

neblina. hukok.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another tribe. pashikãi.

to coil or curl up. ãkroãkiki.

he made love with the woman and gave her two gallinetas. suwe e na ha waakini e kipi hãshimo hipekema.

to make love. waakini.

to take a piece, a part, for oneself (of a flat and round object, of a cassava bread). ayakosirarei.

he tied the capuchin monkey tail around his head, and smoothed it with his hand. ha yohoreni, the teshina hokokama.

to cover one. yoho.

to turn around, change sides, be turned around, turn one's back. mi rakio.

to turn around, change sides, be turned around, turn one. rakio.

the pot has been placed in a twisted position (it is tilted or unstable). toutami si kayarea.

to twist, to coil, to wind. akare.

they (two) leaned the palm tree against (a tree). hii ke hi ha yei ke amo shãhe hãthãpikema.

to lean against something. hãthã.

1. to become thin, lose weight; 2. to remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. tireshe.

to be rapidly invaded by vegetation (a path). wãkereprou.

to pass a bad night, to sleep poorly or not sleep at night. hihirimou.

they called the others who dismembered the animal. pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni.

to cry for a dead person. pokomorãyou.

to be unstable, to wobble, to move or roll under the feet. kapuruo.

to have oneself painted with crossed lines on the body. yãhirimou.

on the other side Tilingo multibandeado in turn enlarged the cavity of the rock (myth). ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

mythological ancestor; hekura associated with the Tilingo multibandeado (Pteroglossus pluricinctus) toucan. piremarithawe.

to be hungry. wawehe.

to fabricate a short bamboo arrowhead, to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (if damaged by impact). theeker.

I went there reluctantly. ya huu mohioma.

to go somewhere reluctantly, unwillingly. mohioma.

the cut of the tree is deep. ka mi shoekewe.

the cut of the tree is deep. ka mi shoekewe.

while I keep the jaguar away (with my supernatural powers), while it stays at a respectful distance, (you can) take down the hammocks and leave. ira the hore hãimai ma kui, ira a hore tikukuprou tehe, thoku ta thaprahe.

I told them not to move away to avoid being hit. pe tikukotihe, ya ma re kuhe ke.

stoke. tikuku.

as those who were walking in front changed direction again, we slid down crouched towards them. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma: ãkroto nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados.

we slid down crouched towards them. ãkroto.

responder. wã hai puhi yopra.

to respond. yoprao.

a cool breeze passes by my sides from time to time. the wahari yakaroprao.

something presses against my sides from time to time. pesayakekerariyo.

the meat is tender. yaro a epehewe.

the bow is too flexible. hãto nahi a epehewe.

not offer resistance to penetration; not be solid (a bond); be tender (a food); not be rigid. hirikamou.

jo, let me descend (from your back). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit.

to make descend, to let descend (someone whom one carries on one. ithopramai.

fish, bocón; Brycon spp. (Characidae). topratoprarimi.

to make fall. fkemai.

have you finished painting your bodies. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

but where have they gone. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

have you found them. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

denotes perplexity or doubt. ku-hawe.

your ugly face is the only one covered in smoke. wa puhi wãri wakeshipi kua ayaa kurawe.

covered in smoke. wakeshipi.

in all parts they are alive and in good health. temi ke the pe wãri perihiwe.

same, identical. perihi.

to start to crush, lacerate, reduce to pieces, crush under a weight, let food disintegrate from overcooking. nahihiprai.

Aheanariwe ran opening a path through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

mythological ancestor. Aheanariwe.

to be standing with one foot a little ahead of the other, and the hand on. kaihio.

Used within a large number of verbal endings (-amai, -prai, -mai, -aprarai, etc.). It is one of the markers of the imperfective (present).. -prai.

to sink, to crumble, to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihomai.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

small, to scratch or uncover the ground with the foot to . hãrãruma.

to shake off water repeatedly. yomikirarei.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

without looking. tepirema.

to be hungry, to have an empty stomach. heheprao.

making the tongue vibrate repeatedly. arerere.

to split a tobacco leaf in two along the central vein. pee nahe ayakosi.

to split or divide in two. ayakosi.

to make something thin, to reduce its thickness. henasikei.

to belong to another community. shokeprawe.

(before) I caught several times in succession. mi wetete.

to catch several times in succession. wetete.

cry loudly (a child, due to a strong scolding, or exaggerating for a scolding or a simple refusal); let out a collective shout. huthei.

you will become heavy again (= the hekura will return to lodge in your body). wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

you will become heavy again. kopariyonowei.

shallow water. u res i.

I really want to have sex. ya peshi ma ta yaitani.

Nosiriwe complained about not having tobacco. nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

to have a strong desire for sex; to lack tobacco; to be angry. fpeshi.

arrow with bamboo point. makepou mi pao thare ke.

point. thare.

they were about to hit them on the nose. pe hushipe mori tuyema.

nose, snout. hushipe.

they were walking towards me with their gaze fixed on the ground searching for my footprints. pe the mi teateapraroimai kuperei, yare mãyo taeihe ha.

they were walking with their gaze fixed on the ground searching for my footprints. teateapraroimai.

to have a swollen groin lymph node. moshipepi.

lymph node of the groin. moshipe.

we arrived at a place where a flat rock protruded from the ground, precisely at the moment when the enemies (lit. pei masi prapariyope ha, yaro re pe katitou totihioimape ha, yamaki kupariyo kurei.

there where a flat rock protruded from the ground, at the place where the enemy warriors were heading, that's where we were (in this sentence yaro, "hunting prey", means "enemy warriors"). pei masi prapariyope ha, yaro re pe katitou totihioimape ha, yamaki kupariyo kurei.

flat rock, rocky surface. prapariyope.

oscillate, be lively. akeakemou.

buttocks. naldonde.

to make someone become very angry (and . yorikipramai.

eye condition where a foreign object or dirt gets between the eye and eyelid. rashapi.

he will die. pe wãri ahipe.

when you have a nightmare, the one that makes you feel strange is the dream spirit. wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi a h i m a r i.

to die, to cool down, to get old (for wood). ahiprou.

it is digging, that one who never sees the light of day (the armadillo). ei the wai re tithare a he wai haruu re maore.

to dig with the front or hind paws (an animal with claws). tithare.

to habitually give many gifts to the same person. prukaaprai.

grated cassava. nashi hki.

grated cassava. hki.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to be divided in different places. shetekeprawe.

to be angry. mapari.

to make die quickly. ahimararei.

to cut. atar.

fruit whose skin separates easily and naturally. ehawe.

they have stolen my knife. siparaye si a thomiremahe.

my knife. siparaye.

to carry on the chest. yuri kã.

when one possesses arrows, like us, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

to kill someone or be able to do so (lit.: possess their breath); to put someone or something in a certain situation, offer someone the possibility of possessing something. thamapou.

my sons-in-law offered me pieces of ice. siyoyahe the peni preyura repe kãi re hiyorariyowei.

they offered me. hiyorariyowei.

soon it became night and they cut firewood. the he titia shorarayoma, koã ãsho poai re shoarariyouwehei.

they cut firewood. shoarariyouwehei.

that it be done quickly during the day. the mi wãri harua ta hairiyo she.

quickly. hairiyo.

to start putting/disposing/cutting to the same measure. manikiprai.

they had made the trunk of air between the tongue and teeth swell, which is called whistling in that way. apia ke hi hurumarei no kureshi.

to make swell, to make dilate. hurumai.

descending path. fyo mi werewe.

descending. wererea.

to have replicated immediately. nokamorayou.

to evaporate, to dry out. weheai.

when the adults were absent, Jaguar killed the children (to eat them). pe hii re the pe no kupramou tehe, irani ihiru re pe shei heama.

to be temporarily absent from the dwelling, to go outside to do work. kupramou.

to paint on someone. hiporoshiai.

his younger brother was (tall) like this. kinaha pe feeshe ke e kuoma.

younger male relative, younger brother. feeshe.

to speak. mi yãhuyãhu.

(habla de río arriba). thaithai henaki.

palm. thaithai.

to extinguish a fire. rãikiãi.

they shot numerous arrows and the noise they made when falling was heard. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

noise produced by numerous arrows falling to the ground. thohuthohumou.

sharp (a bamboo point). hirorore.

as soon as she arrived she sat in the hammock at the side of her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

at the side of. kopohoroni.

the tobacco is getting moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to get moldy. rohorai.

to harbor someone in a hammock hung above another. hethãpori.

to be in the last position (during a collective journey through the forest). shiokakei.

dye of the hekura, when they paint their bodies with it they resemble the crimson fruitcrows. kuhararomi nouku.

crimson fruitcrow. kuhararomi.

as there is mud everywhere, I don't want to stay here. the pe ãhiãhipi ha ya kuo puhiomi ke a tharei.

mud. ãhiãhipi.

to tremble from illness or cold. naha re siprisimou.

to tremble. naha.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I drove the point into the shaft and sat down next to the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to fall due to a blow, to scatter by hitting. tishishi.

to have a bulging belly (jokingly): to be pregnant. maka mãihiomi ushuprarou (bromeando): estar encinta.

be pregnant. mamaika-.

to become less dense, to become more sparse, to thin out (low vegetation). takakai.

to transform into a young woman, to transform into an adolescent, to reach the age of procreation. mokoai.

to smear something. he horoprai.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

to smear or apply something. horo.

the hair (plural). hethãnãuku.

fruits of the pasho ãhuhi shrub (plural). pasho ãhuku.

plural marker. uku.

a man set up his shelter on the path of Siroromiwe. siroromiwe ke a no mãyo hami poreri ke a peria ha reparuni (mit.

Path, trail or mark left by a particular being (real or supernatural). siroromiwe.

tree; Touroulia guianensis (Leg., Caesalpiniaceae). yoyomosi.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. ukahe.

the hekura strangle me. yare orãmi hiyãihe ke.

strangle. hiyãihe.

I'm going to attack them (lit. ya pe yãnopi ta mii sho.

to attack them (lit.: to go to see their house). fyãnopi.

you name, you pronounce the name, do not lie, do not lie. horemotihe.

you name, you pronounce the name, do not lie, do not lie. horemotihe.

why did he throw away the things. weti the nowã ha matohi a hoyarema.

threw away. hoyarema.

the old woman sang the song of anger. suwe patani the ã wãyoã thapema.

anger, rage, wrath. wãyo.

the food of the "Whites" makes you impotent. nape pe niini wamaki ha moyepirini.

they make you impotent. moyepirini.

to make urinate a lot. iheihemomai.

(he) sat with his legs spread apart. kumãrãroriweni irariwe ke yakorotou.

to sit with legs spread apart. yakorotou.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. reiki.

my wife, with whom I make love. ahe.

to have a desire to vomit. suhahaai.

to cry for a deceased person while walking on one of the paths they used to take when alive. f pei yo nohi ohete thaai.

to cry for a deceased person while walking on paths they used to take. ohete.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. wãrãhãnã.

apresúrate en golpearlo. fa wai shetai.

to hit, to strike. wapayou.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or a heavy load being carried). fhuu mi thorukuwe.

to bend, curve, fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. mi thoruku.

plant family containing aroids. Araceae.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway (speaking of the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

they escaped. huwemaiwehei.

they make earth crumble to reach the otter. proro a wãri pakekaihe.

to make earth crumble by striking it with a machete. pakekaihe.

to fall ill one after another. hariritaai.

to be found near each other (in different places). hohãthãprawe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). moshohãwe.

to walk at a certain distance from the others. prihão.

to have become curved or sinuous (often referring to an arrow). ethetherayou.

to surround, to encircle. hithoroko.

bone that breaks into pieces and can be used to make harpoon points for arrows. tikaropramou.

to miss a shot. posi waa.

to miss, to err. waa.

I have the urge to urinate. ya niaasi ihe.

to have the urge to urinate. niaasi.

Woodpecker clung abruptly to a curare vine and pecked it. mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

to hang upside down; to dangle. yautaai.

in such a way that its end is completely flat and smooth, as the large beetles of the simitori species do when gnawing on tree branches. de manera tal que su extremidad quede totalmente plana y lisa, como lo hacen los grandes coleópteros de la especie simitori cuando carcomen las ramas de un árbol.

to cut/carve in such a way that the end is completely flat and smooth, as large beetles of the simitori species do when gnawing on tree branches. simitori.

to grow (child). hatukeai.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

Guianan Toucanet (bird species). Aroaromawe.

fyo ithoa: path that crosses a watercourse. fyo ithoa: camino que atraviesa un curso de agua.

path. camino.

you, you are content with eating (alone) little by little the wapu fruits. kaheni wapu wa ki wapraai poo e.

you (pl) do not matter to me. k ahe wamaki kuo poo.

to do (without caring about the consequences), to do (without apparent reason); to be content with. wapraai.

to let a magic substance drip onto someone's head. yãnote una sustancia mágica sobre la cabeza de alguien.

to leak, to drip (a liquid); a little clear (a tint). reshi.

they prepared totumas (containers), because they intended to consume papilla of pijiguao (fruits) on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

to consume papilla (softened fruits) on the way. koaheriiwehei.

to do it quickly. wãhewãhemou.

to be a man. pikukai.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiaprarou.

to move quickly, to hurry. haiaprarou.

as Amoãyoma wants to go under it, the leaves of the singing tree embellish it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro.

to get under, to go underneath. pehithou.

to make dry by smoking. tetekemapei.

he is making a lot of noise (myth). the ka naki mrai tehe yotenama a pahetiraremahe.

he is making a lot of noise. pahetiraremahe.

round object broken into several pieces in that way. wahathoma.

hang my hammock where your wife is, and do not lie with her after I leave. wa suwepi kuope ha yiiye keki ta yaumaki, ei keki ha wa yakaprao hoo tikoo mai.

to remain lying together in a hammock for a moment. yakaprao.

they are many, standing one next to the other, with their heads covered in white down. pe he horoi yorukuwe (mit.

to stand in large numbers close together, forming a compact mass. yorukuprawe.

I am hungry. hiyomi mo.

to be hungry. hiyomi.

at that point Barba blanca (nickname) leaves to attack the enemy shamans. kaweiki aumani hekura pe shurukai mi hua re shoarayoheriiwei.

to attack. aumani.

they just left (one after the other). pe the pe huokei ke a kuhe.

to leave, to depart (one after the other). huokei.

to become as big as, to become equal to (in quantity, in height); to align; to cut (elongated objects) maintaining the same length (or the same height); to equalize quantities, values. usuku.

to point with a finger. imiki himio.

to point with a finger, to indicate with a finger. himio.

I was watching the arrows with bamboo tips that were aimed at us. ya mamo shatioma, rahaka ke peki re puruhuoperei.

arrows with bamboo tips. shatioma.

with your husband (where he is). ete con tu marido (allí donde él se encuentra).

with your husband. ete.

over his shoulder he carried the fish he had caught, wrapped in leaves. yuri ke ki yokerarema e hãro ha yehireni.

they turn over the bundles roasting on the embers. pe hãro mi hapei re kupeiwehei.

bundle of leaves in which food is cooked on the embers. hãroma.

to burn two. koa wake oramapou.

to burn two. koa wake ora.

venomous snake, splendid snake (Bothrops sp. wãrishana waro ke ki.

to become splendid, to turn into a venomous snake. wãrishana.

give me a part of your wad of tobacco. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to undo a wad of tobacco to take out a part and offer it or for oneself. pee nahe hako.

brave man. nosiyeriwe.

Hoashiriwe (proper name). hoashiriwe.

to make a drink or food spicy. nakeprai.

it is hooked. mi thorukua.

to be hooked. thorukua.

the chiggers detach (from the feet where they are lodged). hihu nape hayoyai.

same meaning as hayo, but with plural subject. fhayoyo.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni.

The hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. Shapokonayoma.

over there the váquiros (a type of bird) gather in large numbers. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

to move in large numbers, one after the other. manikou.

he snored and also talked in his sleep. a hohoruãmoma, a kãi poremoma.

to talk, shout or moan while sleeping. poremou.

although the hekura goes towards the central plaza. y ãnomãmi the nape huu maopehe ha.

central plaza. maopehe.

I drink water. mau ya u koai.

The beehive is really splendid, let's drink the honey (mixed with water). puu ke a topraa yaia, pema u ta koa.

If only I could drink fresh water. si ahi ya the u wãri ha koarini.

to drink, to ingest a liquid food. koamou.

when you shoot a short arrow at an animal, you will always hit it, a longer one will always go too far. yaro wa niyai ha horotowe ani wa katitai, rape a he piyehou tehe.

go further, go beyond, exceed. piyehou.

the great rock is completely smooth. maa ke ma pata si frakahawe totihiw e.

to be completely smooth, to be smooth and moist. frakahawe.

to acquire an oblong shape; to elongate a little. toroherariyo.

they had put themselves one next to the other and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

side of the other. thã-.

if you refuse to do it, I will start throwing dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to start throwing dirt (sand, mud) at someone, to start punishing a child in that way. pahuprai.

to make love (said by a male speaker). yeriyerimou.

lightning. tãhimi.

when you are thirsty, you roll up a funnel-shaped leaf and collect the water from the stream that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

funnel-shaped leaf (for putting something inside). yotãyotãmope.

he climbed back up and initiated the last part of his ascent. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

initiated the last part of his ascent. poushokuaharayoma.

they danced one after the other and, when they finished, night fell. the pe ha praitaaruni, the pe ha prairini the mi titiray o m a.

we will go towards you dancing (the hekura say to the novice who is being initiated). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye (cha.

to perform the presentation dance during a festival that brings together a community (or several); the guests dance first and then the hosts follow. prairini.

The matches provide comfort (thanks to them we can warm ourselves), they make sleep pleasant. pohoro hi re the pe ha the pe topramapou, pe the pe mimapou totihio.

to put someone in a certain state for them to have a good sleep. mimapou.

to accompany a lone person, to help them. thãrimapou.

to have split longitudinally, to have cracked lengthwise (a long object). ikrãkãrãyou.

to turn around (perfective). mi rakikei.

to turn around, change sides, be turned around, turn one. rakikei.

you will weave an open-weave basket or mapire and we will paint ourselves (imprinting the hexagonal pattern of the mapire on our skin). yoroﬁ ke wa tiyepe, pefeki onimope.

to weave an open-weave basket or mapire. tiyepe.

I ask you please not to lie. nasimou tikoo mai.

lie; be mistaken; pretend. nasimou.

retomen tierra firme dispersándose. pe ta hashirio rãikiomopotu.

dispersing; spreading out in different directions. rãikiomopotu.

I provoked the flight of many paujíes. paruri ya pe shuriramama.

to make flutter; to provoke the flight of numerous birds (during hunting). shuriramai.

relationship of father-in-law or mother-in-law to son-in-law. hesiyopiye.

they are always directing their guns against us: let them shoot then, it doesn't matter. kopeta a shiro hore puhuraihe ha, niyaai poohe.

they are directing (something long like an arrow or gun) against someone. puhuraihe.

the (cut) head was moving and came to rub against the leg. pei ke heni matha hurii kuaai ha yaioni.

stay still (stop touching everything). hurii ayatou mai.

to touch, to rub against something. hupa.

paper. papeo.

left arm. deAnat.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent under the weight of the tapir climbing on it. kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei.

to bend under weight. totionowei.

there is a wasp nest in the waterfall, we (you and I) will go burn it. pora ke a ha kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

wasp. pora.

large white larva; Pelidnota chamaeleon (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). oropori.

to have fabricated a slightly longer arrow than usual. tireherarei.

to have a numb limb, to start feeling a tingling sensation. poteteai.

to have been torn off in that manner. hahathoa.

we fished upstream from where the Karesisiwe river flows into another river. karesisiwe u re papohori ha pemaki yuri kããma.

river that flows into another river. karesisiwe.

—Is it beautiful. —a riyehewe. —No. —ma.

Is it beautiful?. riyehewe?.

cicada (unidentified animal or plant). yakoro.

to spread gossip, to spread lies. wãnomou.

you have seen the mistress of the bamboo tips (that is why you are brave). yawanayoma wa tararema kutaeni.

female spirit associated with bamboo tips. yawanayoma.

don't hit them (the bats, with your arrows) or the okã will come. pe he yoatihe, okã ke pe.

to hit on the head with a stick (a person, an animal), to strike with the end of an elongated object (stick or arrow), to hit flying animals with the end of one or several arrows. yoatihe.

put your two hands there (to receive it), it is a male (who is being born). pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke a hoã.

to put the hand on something (sometimes with the intention of stealing), to have the hand placed on something. wariai.

embryos. iprusha no.

to sway, to swing (especially when carrying objects on the back). maimaimo.

edge, border. manikai.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or cambures so that they ripen). yaroramai.

to hang low. preyukuaai.

to comb someone. yakekou.

Õmawe advanced crouched so as not to be seen and quickly found himself near (the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei (mit.

two of us advanced crouched to observe the monster rahara. porakapi peni pe opisi terekou tehe, rahara keki mimahe.

to advance crouched (to go unnoticed). terei.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long stretched-out line. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

to move forming a stretched-out line. fririhou.

catch a knife fish (and cook it) on one of these leaves that you will lick. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

to catch a fish by pulling the fishing line. shaiai.

the attribute of the hekura (rihu u) was about to come to me. rihu uni ya nape mori ithou he yatiokirioma.

to be about to come, to be on the verge of coming. yatiokirioma.

they killed the person whose son lives in another community. ihi re ihirupi hoã wãri perihou ma re kui pe wãri sherema ha tharahei.

to live in another place, to live in another community. perihou.

to adjust badly, to put crookedly, to introduce badly, to close imperfectly; to not bury deep enough. hietiamai.

when felling an apia tree, I flattened the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

I flattened the ocumo plants. yatikimaparei.

the skull of the tapir is there, full of termites. kihi shama ke the hesi pata ereeremapi kona shi ma totihii.

skull, cranium. ereeremapi.

to kill many animals during a hunt. yohumou.

banana plantation. kuratha siki.

cane plantation for arrows. haprua ma siki.

The totality of the skin. Set of certain plants (those that have si as a classifier): bananas, palms, cassava plants, cane plantations for arrows, etc.. tesiki.

the children eat the pulp of the cucuritos scraping it with their teeth. ihiru peni kareshi pe wãhehãihe.

to scrape with the teeth the pulp of a fruit (to eat it). wãhehãi.

to form longitudinal folds. wãukuãi.

we will stop several times on the way to eat. p efeki iyaa kãi roataroferipe.

we will stop several times on the way to eat. roataroferipe.

the flesh of the shosho fruits adhered strongly (to the shell). shosho moku shãhe warioma.

adhered strongly. warioma.

we two are dirty (he and I). kamiye yaheki shapehekini pehe pe niyapraama.

we two are dirty. shapehekini.

to be angry. kareshe.

give that to the one lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

to lie down for a moment in the shikã (lower part of the roof) of a dwelling. shikãprao.

a plant used in black magic. wakamoshiki.

like the Anteater was looking for (something), it raised its snout. teperiwe ke a taeo ha, hiyoka mi nonoãpraroma.

to raise the snout to sniff. ﬁyokaki.

others are ambushed a little further away. ai the pe rea he piyehetaa.

are ambushed a little further away. piyehetaa.

Leaf, tree leaf; plant with leaves. yãã hena Hoja, hoja de árbol; planta con hojas. Pl. Pl. leaves of a plant; set of leaves belonging to the same plant. yãã de su casa; haye yaa ke e si sipo, masiko e ki re h e n a k i: conjunto de hojas pertenecientes a una rere hami yoka horea kure.

arrugó hojas entre las manos y desnudó el suelo con el pie. yãã ke the henaki ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakini.

leaf, foliage, plant with leaves. yãã.

to kill a brave man (and thus put the enemies in distress). yapekeprai.

The roasted banana whose burnt outer layer has been removed. Hãsikiã wake huu koporoma ã.

food whose burnt outer layer has been removed. hãsikiã.

they climbed (the mountain) and, as they were climbing, Kasima felt dizzy. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a V.

go look for your father (on the plain, at the foot of the mountain). haahe ke a nape ta kuthoheri.

implies a linear downward movement (or the reverse), to descend following a straight line, to march in a line, to place oneself at the foot of a tree, etc.. -tho.

to break several objects. senyaresherarei.

towards what direction did they direct their faces. weti hami ke pe mi kuprariyoherii kuhe.

they directed their faces (towards). kuprariyoherii.

we abducted a woman from their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to abduct a woman by force. shairei.

once I gathered all the leaves (needed to cover the roof) from my father, I then went to get the ones I needed. haye ya henaki ha omarini, ipa ya henaki thai piyea.

to complete, to gather enough. omai.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

He arrived after his departure, he has a light complexion. a wãri haa hepei ma re kuroi, a prushishiwe ke a thai.

to have a light complexion, to be light-colored. prushishi.

I have discovered them before the others. ya the ki ayarema.

I have discovered them before the others. ayarema.

"you have had a slip of the tongue", this is the news that I will truly spread. "wa aka tihekia re yaipe", a wãno wã thaprai yaia kutaeni.

to make a slip of the tongue, to have a lapse. tihekiai.

I went to see. ya miãkema.

they came to see (watch over) this path. hei re yo wãri miãkeyorumahe.

to go to see. miãkema.

progressed slowly river downstream, one after the other. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

progressed slowly one after the other. hirihipekiriowei.

hija mía, ve a buscar (= a recoger) mis pijiguaos. oãsi, rashaye ke ki ta yuatu.

yo tomo un solo arco. tahiapi hãto ya nahi yuai.

to go to get, to go to look for. yuaprai.

to start smoothing/making smooth and wet. frakahaprai.

to start making tobacco wads. humiprai.

to cook rapidly (plantain, root or tuber). homo.

drizzle. maa remaãshi.

drizzle. remaãshi.

to cram, pack tightly. hithoko.

"wa, wa, wa. "wa, wa, wa. ", the váquiros walked in a line one behind the other. ", ware ke ki kuu kãi tutuatayoma.

we walked in a line and heard the women crying. yamaki re tutuaiwei, suwe re pe miã kuoma.

they walked in a line one behind the other. tutuatayoma.

to kill. atat.

line up here. heyeha ke wamaki ha masisoni.

to line up side by side (with faces in the same direction). masisitou.

it is slightly shiny. the wãisipi mimou tapihiwe.

to be slightly greasy/shiny. tapihi.

it seems that those who went on reconnaissance have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

to discover, to notice something in the forest. aruhei.

to become slippery (interior of an object). takra.

they make love (they two). ke kipi wamou.

to make love (polite speech), to have sex. sirisirimo.

I eat a yuvía (fruit). hawari ya koko oai.

bite my nose. yare hu ta opari.

to eat (something crunchy), to bite (a more or less spherical object), to break with the teeth (a spherical object). anaki.

that brave man. hei a pata re nosiyemope.

that brave man. nosiyemope.

to blow (a substance) at someone, to aim at a precise spot (excluding the eye and head). horakei.

Orilla alta de un meandro, lugar en donde la corriente choca contra la orilla erosionándola poco a poco: la orilla es alta, el agua profunda y los peces se refugian allí durante la estación seca.. heprou.

expression referring to chachalacas (lit: those that rub with colorant). hei ki re hirikope.

expression referring to the habit of chachalacas (a type of bird) to roll in mud. hirikope.

Psidium (Myrtaceae) tree (lit. matoto-pore hi.

Psidium (Myrtaceae) tree. matoto-pore.

Jaguar slowly crouched down. irariwe ke a ha roaruni.

dawn broke gradually. the mi ha harutaaruni.

gradually, slowly, little by little. -ariyo.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

encounter. encuentro.

to go very far, to move away. yaheriai: 1.

to go far away, to pass from one side to another. yaheri.

(he/she) pecks (fish). noshi ihitaai.

to peck (fish, when one is fishing). hita1.

ithore 1 vb. ithore 1 vb. intr. intr. t ithoreai, inc. t ithoreai, inc. : to curve, to bend; to become curved, bent. : curvar, doblar; ponerse curvo, doblado.

bent. doblado.

come, we both will work in the conucos. hapo, peheki hikarimope.

to work in the conucos (agricultural plots). hikarimope.

you see well that these machetes have truncated blades (are bad and old). hei sipara pe ma re fematha totihii.

Spirit-toucan flew in turn towards the swinging truncated liana. rasirasi thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepirithawe a yei re notioimi.

truncated, amputated, cut off. hematha.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

the demon of the night was perched on a branch that curved towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma.

to bend, curve, arch. hithoreai.

to place oneself. hohãthããi.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks (and abandon the camp) while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe.

to push away, reject with the hands (once); to reject an evil being, keep it at a distance. hirurua.

go lie down over there. a ta periikutu.

go lie on the ground over there. a ta praikutu.

to be situated at a certain distance. -ikutu.

weeds, vegetation that regrows on cleared or burned land. kaukau.

I have cut a piece of lechosa. shamakoro ya hakarokema.

to cut a piece of something. hakarokema.

the guayacan tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

guayacan tree; Tabebuia guayacan (Bignoniaceae). thomoro.

I put a cover on the pot. to utami ya si ka he raai.

to close, to cover for a moment. ratai.

to make a large quantity of. thetheprai.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with his molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

fruit of the toatoa mohi tree. toatoa.

to be convinced that someone is a braggart or a chatterbox, to be convinced that a person will not carry out their threats. nohi hehe-.

make the strips flexible, make a hammock with a braid that joins the strips at the center, and then offer it to me. wa e the ki ha uhutitiprarini, wa e the ki peushoku ha tiyeprarini.

to make a hammock by braiding strips of bark together at the center. peushoku.

to be reddish. wakehe.

they had grabbed it without realizing (along with other objects). pe tea hãrorema.

as an arrowhead had unfortunately struck one of his children (during the confrontation), we threatened each other. ãtãri ãhini pe ihirupi a ha hãroprariheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

to do something inadvertently, clumsily or unfortunately. hãrorema.

when one feels forced to lie down (due to the effect of hallucinogens), the posts that support the roof start to oscillate. the pe peritamai tehe, hãto ke nahi mohe pe hotehotemou.

to swing or oscillate. ayerikayerimo.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk. waroroaprarou.

the wariomi koheshi spiders move around. wariomi koheshiki erekou.

manner of climbing trees: the arms surround the trunk, while the feet, almost together and parallel to the body axis, simply grip the trunk. koheshiki.

presence. kuami.

to make several objects narrow. fmakosimai.

to shoot an arrow. rihu masi tiheheai.

the demons took my son (lit: the demons took my son holding him by the arm). yai theni rihuye masi yepirei kuhe.

thin palm wood arrow with hardened tip by fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. Flechita.

a great quantity of termites swarmed in the water. mãu u hami komi konaki tishoshama.

a compact group. tishoshama.

starry (sky). shitikaripi.

to release a person who has been restrained to prevent them from committing acts of violence, once they have calmed down. huhuraprai.

the bees have stung me so much that my scalp hurts. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to kill a good hunter of giant cachicamos (during a ceremonial speech). fhesiki k u s h e a i.

skull, cranium; shell (of a turtle, crab, cachicamo). fhesiki.

to be sharp, pointed. shiriri.

the tobacco quid is soft (has too much water). pee nahe uwe.

the wound is oozing. warasi a uwe.

to ooze, to exude, to seep. uweai.

older brother, here is an excellent palm heart. yei ke ãmo wai wãnipraa kure: hermano mayor, he aquí un excelente palmito.

palm heart. ãmo.

to cover. pahu.

to do it for oneself. pahetirei.

I'm going with the others to fetch water. mãu ya u ta ishakomai nareo sho.

the entire vine forms a hook. thoo thotho ishakowe.

bent branch. fhii poko tishakoa.

to curve into a hook shape, to bend into an arc. ishakoai.

he was standing in the central plaza. hehã hami a upraoma.

to be standing, to be located in the central area. upraoma.

do not gather in large numbers. pe mi shuããtihe.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuãã.

those who were not working. pe re ohotamou mãoheni.

as she was pregnant and could not run fast, the jaguar killed her. the shipenapi yaro the haiprou ha mãoni irani a sherema.

as they did not want to give up, one after another they began to groan. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to be in the process of, to be ongoing. mãoni.

to cry for a dead person. tutomou.

to be wet from rain, to exhale, to feel. pathe.

they went towards the house of the h e k u r a. h e k u r a kama pe yahi hami pe rii kuaai re shoaonowei.

they went. shoaonowei.

destined. destina.

to pile up tobacco leaves one on top of the other and make balls to keep them dry. ithorikei.

I will expect this to happen. ya puhi kãi peritaope.

I will expect this to happen. peritaope.

to snort water through the nose. t u fririãi.

to snort water through the nose, generally to remove hallucinogenic residue from the nostrils after heavy consumption. fririãi.

I have slippery hands and things keep slipping out of them. ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

he lowered the turtle (making it slide along its support) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to slide down, to slip down. yohotai.

1. To thin out, become thin. 2. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails.. tiresheai.

green, raw, unseasoned wood. riye: verde, crudo, madera no seca.

green, raw, unseasoned wood. riye.

to cram, pack tightly. hishikiamai.

it is in the basket. wii hami the titia.

to be placed in a cavity. titia.

to split, divide, separate into parts. shererekãprou.

object that can be offered. hipemou.

the end of the stick is twisted several times. the hi ora toyekewe.

completely twisted or bent; twisted in several places. toyekeprawe.

the jaguar howled in pain and rubbed itself against the trees (to remove the tortoise that was biting its throat). ira ke a rããmorayoma, hii ke hiki hami a hãrikiãprarama.

1. Fry, roast, toast. 2. Rub two objects together.. hãrikiãi.

they cut off the jaguar's head. ira ke he pata pahetiprai ha kuparuheni.

head of a fierce beast to burn it and take revenge for its misdeeds. pafeti.

the urine caused the tearing of the leaves. pei re niaasi peni yãã henaki hetimai kupariyoma.

to break an elongated object by exerting pressure on it, to tear, to produce a tear or rupture. hetimai.

don't laugh. i k ã t i h e.

Baba started laughing. iwariwe ke a ikãpraroma (mit.

to laugh while moving. prarou.

to separate a portion of meat by breaking it off with the hand, to offer it; to take a bit of tobacco from one. hako.

Did they really return using the same path that they took going, which is the correct path. pe pe mi wãri yapahou topraa waikia ke a ta kurani.

correct path/way. kurani.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, to warn, to advise. yimirãrei.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

put on. tikrohai.

next to, parallel to. fpoa hami.

next to, parallel to. fpoa.

to rise up, come off (skin of a smoked fish). proprokoai.

they got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

to get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people), to detach and fall one after another (fruits). weyoyou.

he was wearing earrings of cotinga blue skin. heimi siki reikimapoma.

he was wearing earrings of cotinga blue skin. reikimapoma.

the people (the men and women, the human beings) passed one after the other, clinging to the floating trees. pe hami yãnomãmi the pe yetekeo tehe the pe hayupraama.

to pass in front of. hayua.

Rabipelado threw his poisoned dart at Lagarto at the moment when he (mounted on a tree) worked with his hands free. refariwe ke a mi re kayahaaprarou tehe, nãroriwe a horama.

to hang in the void, to be mounted on a tree with ankles tied and hands free to work. mi kayaha.

don't be afraid, wait a moment and let's talk. kiritihe, waiha, peheki ã ta wayo.

don. kiritihe.

if they take hallucinogens and the hekura converge towards them, I am then convinced that they are true shamans. the pe epena ha koarini, the pe hekurapi hoã puhurao ha, mori: "ei re pe yai.

to set about doing something, to be doing something. puhurao.

to walk in a long line (in silence). atraprithothoprou.

to dance in the central plaza during a celebration with another community, to participate in a presentation dance. shuwahimou.

to remove leaves from a path with the hand and place them on the ground (for good luck during a search). hãrãruãrei.

The disease demons devour my flesh (= they strip me of flesh). shawara ke kini yare tire-sheai kure.

1. Remove a louse stuck to hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; detach with the nails fragments of meat from a bone. 2. Become very thin.. tireshe.

they are people of the Mahekoto community who did it, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to gather among related people (brothers and/or parallel cousins), among members of the same community. shiroprou.

to fall off, become uprooted. si poru.

Dormilona se pintaba el cuerpo detrás de un gran árbol. hii ke hi pata ãyori ha wathaperariwe a yãmoma.

to paint, to color. yãmoma.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

to bite suddenly (a fish biting the bait). yomirei.

to peel, to remove bark or skin. tiprokou.

to have become loose, to have become slack. preyukurayou.

to be a little dry and hard, to be smoked. ya re ropaa herayoheriiwei, pei ya shiro hi.

fast, quickly. ropa.

it was because I defended myself alone that I am still alive. kamiye re ya nohi ha peyeoni ya rii t e m i.

to defend oneself. peyeoni.

they had placed themselves side by side and Macagua was directing them (myth). ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to dig repeatedly in the ground or earth to make the hole wider and deeper. theitheimou.

como los que caminaban a la cabeza cambiaron otra vez de dirección, nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction. akeheprou.

you, you will crouch down under him and get under his back without him noticing. k afe pei ke pehithepi hami ha wa fa yereikuni, pei ke fumapi hami wa kuprou fãthoowe.

to crouch down with limbs drawn in and neck tucked in (in order to not be seen). yereikuni.

their corpses were scattered on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

shosho fruits without shell were scattered on the ground, they gathered them. shosho mope warokoshi mi tikukuoma, mo hokamahe.

they scattered, they spread out (perfective, plural object). tikukurayou.

he obstructed the oriﬁce of the hole where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

to close an oriﬁce, to wall up. he raai.

nostrils. hiyokaki.

oriﬁce, hole, opening. oriﬁcio.

while he was occupied, he glanced briefly at his son-in-law who raised his head towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

to raise one. nonotia.

they are back and their voices are suddenly heard. pei the pe koprããi yaro, the pe ãhã pakayupraikiyoni.

their voices are suddenly heard. pakayupraikiyoni.

round, spherical. komore koopari mahi 1 estado t komore: redondo, esférico.

round, spherical. komore.

we walked under the komorã palms. erima: anduvimos bajo las palmas komorã si.

we walked under the komorã palms. erima.

they are many, standing one next to the other, with their heads covered in white down. pe he horoi yorukuwe (mit.

to stand in large numbers close together, forming a compact mass. yorukuwe.

short, truncated, oblong. homotowe.

Variety of pijiguao palm whose fruit is yellowish. wakewerimi.

They go to camp in the forest to eat wild fruits near the place where they are harvested. nape shuruku vb. He caught the woman at the moment she was going to flee in the company of her father; ware ha nakaheni ya huo nareopeherayou shurukouhe: they asked me to go with them and I accompanied them to camp in the forest to eat morã fruits. trans.

a fruit. momorã.

to make thick or dense (plural objects). supraakei.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

to fill a container to the brim. rahokei.

to become slippery (inside of an object) (perfective). takrarayou.

to have become spotted or mottled locally. hayapishirayou.

to build temporary shelters to sleep in. e naha mothoka kuo tehe, heweriwe a mimou shoa.

to sleep. shoa-.

there where the Phasmidae insects climbed. mosha re pe pata torereprarope hami.

type of insect of the Phasmidae family. torereprarope.

to be supernatural, generally manifested when inhaling a plant. ohara.

to be supernatural, generally manifested when inhaling a plant, the pore henaki (lit.: leaves of the apparition), or when one has been the victim of the maleficence produced by means of another plant called hayakoari henaki (lit.: the plant of the hayakoari) also known as mashohara henaki. ohara.

to place the arms along the body or have them like that. wikokoo.

manner that the koãmirimi siki have. koahimo.

ellos quedaron tullidos sobre el suelo. the pata shikopi praa re hekeiwei.

tullidos, debilitados, sin fuerzas. hekeiwei.

I dyed the cotton red. Keprai wake here.

to dye red, to make something red. keprai.

result of doing something to take the contents. oshokorema.

to prepare a substance (curare, a condiment) by leaching, pouring boiling water over a layer of a pulverized product. kamikei.

It has sprouted. Shipukutupi wakexi.

to sprout, to grow. shipukutupi.

I pulverize it. ya e pe ha kopeaprani.

to pulverize it. kopeaprani.

he cleared the way by pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand; to clear the way by pushing aside something obstructing the path. hãiprarini.

cesta de tejido apretado fabricada por las mujeres con el bejuco masimasi. hoko siki.

to separate a banana shoot (of the kuratha variety) from the mother plant, to transplant it. kuratha si kararu tikarei.

to separate a banana shoot from the mother plant, to transplant it. tikarei.

the Yanomami dedicate themselves all the time to committing malevolent acts. yãnote una sustancia mágica sobre la cabeza de alãmi the ki he reshiprou ma re kuti.

The Yanomami people. Yanoami.

you will call us cowards unjustly. kamiye wamare he hore yathepe.

to feel sick, to treat someone as a coward. yathe.

the fish jump out of the water one after the other, they jump out of the water. yuri ke ki he ruhupraai, pe ki he ruhou totihio.

to jump out of the water (a fish). ruhu.

don't be afraid, wait a moment and let's talk. peheki ã ta wayo: no temas nada, espera un momento y conversemos.

to converse, to talk. wayo.

to emerge (elongated object). shorokoai.

some reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

1. To reach the high part of a riverbank (the water of a flood). 2. To approach the shore, to navigate a canoe close to the riverbank. ihetete.

Jaguar tasted (cautiously) with the tip of the tongue. ira ihete pe re aka mi wai hore ha tetoni.

to taste with the tip of the tongue. tetoni.

when it thunders loudly, one jumps in fright. ikãri yãru a wã hai tehe the pe kiriapramai.

to make someone jump in fright, to startle someone. iriaprai.

to kill a brave man (and thus put the enemies in distress). yapekeprai.

1. to fall ill (and due to this disrupt the course of one. yapeke.

he separated the firebrands quickly and set fire to the leaves. kai ke wake ha kushetarini henaki wake piyemak e m a.

to untie quickly, to separate quickly. kushetarini.

high, elevated. tire.

large edible caterpillar (unidentified) that abounds in certain mountainous regions during the rainy season, several kilos can be harvested in the same place. pãrima si.

"Leave her here (and abandon her)", the yawari said. "eyeha re a wãri ta huhea hairihe", yawari pe kuma.

here, in this place (where the speaker is located). hairihe.

baskets full of momo fruits. n cestas llenas de frutos momo.

(type of fruit). momo.

to quickly unravel, untwist, or unthread. kusheshetai.

to become light, to be lightened. erehe.

to split off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pakaro.

to make something sweet. kretetiprai.

yaharaa (myth): the leaves of the shãpinama bush are abundant. yaharaa (mit.

abundant, numerous. yaharaa.

fireflies, glow worms. purima ãhuku.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to eat one food accompanying it with another, to eat meat with roasted or boiled green plantains, or with cassava bread. tehiai.

they put the tapir liver to cook. shama ãmo pe re tupeiwehei.

they put (something) to cook. tupeiwehei.

he had crushed a guaritoto against the ground. api ke nasiki wai raipraama kurahari (mit.

a spiny plant (Urera caracasana). guaritoto.

mythological ancestor who participated in stealing fire from Baba. Yorekitirawe.

the moon has a musty smell. peripo a ni hoteri.

to smell musty. hoteri.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). yori.

to detect a very faint noise. wã rukei.

to detect a very faint noise. wã ruke.

to divide into several groups (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). shetekerayou.

golden-headed manakin (a type of bird). ãrikinãmi.

to come undone during cooking. rehihipei.

Miel appeared. yãmonãmãriwe a petariyoma.

he fell and cried out in pain. a ha kerini, a rããmorayoma.

verb suffix indicating perfective aspect. riyo.

to plant tightly. tiai shatitiwe.

to fix, stick, pierce (multiple objects). shatiti.

to open, to separate (like the petals of a flower). watetai.

to let a fire go out, to let it extinguish little by little (by ceasing to feed it). wãnonomakei.

I take beads (I pick a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to pick, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãokei.

stop complaining about not having received a share. nakimou mai wa wãri ha kuoni.

to complain about not having received a share in a distribution of food, or to complain about not having received the share one expected to receive. nakimor.

lie down in your hammock. warapawe yaweroope, wa pe maikaprari.

lie down. maikaprari.

venomous snake; Bothrops colombiensis (Viperidae). karihirima ke ki heã.

to make an oblong object. torohai.

malaria. prisiprisi.

laziness keeps one in a numb state. fthe pe shi harihimapou.

to keep in a numb state. harihimapou.

associated with the howler monkey. iroriw e.

associated with the howler monkey. iroriw.

the souls danced one after the other. porepore pe praiai mi hetuoma.

to do in turn, to alternate, to change activity or instrument. raiai.

to return to the communal house one after another, generally after activities carried out in the forest or in the garden plot. shaponopraai.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin (perfective, plural subject). turekerariyo.

to repeat incessantly. kuu yakeo.

to repeat incessantly. kuu.

to make a circular motion in the water; to clean a container with water by making a circular motion with the hand, to wash a cloth by making that motion; to stir the water in a circle with the foot to make the fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yaprokoai.

a type of small bird belonging to the genus Thamnophilus (Thamnophilidae), with bluish-gray plumage and white spots on the wings. ushishimi.

The revenge is complete, they have avenged the dead (lit. enaha re ãhi rii kuwe, ãhi rii akatahuprai waikirayou kuhahei.

to break a harpoon arrowhead in two (to avenge a war death). ãtãri ãhi akatahuprai.

to make noise while walking. shurushuruu.

the rope of the canoe has come undone. kanawa a natha kusheprariyoma.

it has come undone. kusheprariyoma.

do not gather in large numbers. pe mi shuããtihe.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuããi.

to reflect, to seek a solution; to search in memory. taerayou.

they make love (the two of them). ke kipi wamou.

to make love (said by a male speaker). yeriyerimo.

to have a period (menstruation). iyemou.

to make scarce (multiple objects), to deplete (multiple objects). resheshãmãi.

to start making bamboo. hitotoprai.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to receive or have someone give you a part of another person. hakopei.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

sharpens. imisiki.

he immediately scraped the muscles of his neck, then those of his arms. pei re orahi the hami the hokekãi shoaoma, pei poko hami the pe kãi hokekãma.

to scrape, remove the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting superficially, clean the bottom of a pot by scraping. hokekãi.

to produce whirlpools in the water with the foot to make things on the bottom surface, to search in that way for moriche fruits that fall into the water. kapokosin.

to begin to surpass (in height). toreheai.

I slept for a moment. no owe ya mitariyoma.

to sleep for a moment. mitariyoma.

while constructing the walkway, the young men really made a lot of noise dragging the poles on the ground. pei u ka ha ihiraki ke ki thaihe ha the ki huya tãrãrãmotii yaioma.

to make noise by dragging poles on the ground. tãrãrãmotii.

se oía el ruido de la (carne) cruda que masticaban. riye ke the pe ha the pe shãkãushãkãumoma.

produce al masticar un alimento. shãkãushãkãumoma.

to peel banana. pehiki yutuho.

to peel. yutuho.

the child was already stiff from death. kasheshewe ihiru ke a wãri kua waikirayoma.

to be installed in a too taut hammock and have, as a consequence, the body straight. kashesheo.

I'm going to ask quickly. ya ta wãripraa.

the others observed the ripe cambures and asked "What is it. ai peni tate pe ha tararini, pe wãrima, "weti pei ke the ki rii. ". ".

to ask repeatedly, to keep asking. wãritaai.

to smell of fish; the smell of a woman who has just given birth. itimori.

symbolically during a search. yarori ke peni pei bólicamente durante una búsqueda. syn. sin. yãã heke iye pe wãri hami pe yãmoma (myth): the antepanaki hãrãru (who later were to become animals), painted their bodies with blood. yãã heke iye pe wãri hami pe yãmoma (mit.

the ancestors (who later became animals). antepanaki.

where is my capuchin monkey's tail. weti hami wishaye teshina.

at the moment when Titiri's tail was hanging down, Horonami killed him. titiri teshinaki ithãprao tehe horonamini a waikai shoaoma.

tail, stinger, caudal feather, tail of a mammal. teshina.

(he/she) speaks upriver and also it can be The word 'yare' in Yanomami means 'caí'. yare hifeti.

he hit me on the head and also it can be The word 'yare' in Yanomami means 'to feel the effects'. yare he shepema.

upriver. yare.

to start kneading cassava flour so that it remains a little liquid inside. urereprai.

to become dusty, to get covered in dust. hekãhekãpiprou.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something outside before entering a dwelling. hewemapani.

to transport on the back two dead animals tied together. erekepou.

to transport on the back two dead animals tied together. erekepou.

the demons of the night passed. weyari pe re hayuyonowei.

we (two) want them to pass us, that's why we stop. yahe pe niya re hayuamakiriowei, yaheki uprapekirio.

to pass in front of someone. hayu.

they offered us (me and him) fish. yuri pe ha yahereki toperemahe: nos (a mí y a él) ofrecieron pescado.

him/her (dual). yahereki.

to open, to separate (like the petals of a flower). wateteprou.

he slid his hand along the strings of the hammocks. pei re the pe peki hami imiki waroroataroma.

to slide along. waroroai.

they (two) shot arrows at the tapir while it was swimming across the Heritha river. heritha u ha shama a karei tehe a niyapima.

to cross by swimming. karekei.

to insert a flexible fiber or feather into the nostrils to induce sneezing. hiyokaki hishão.

to insert a twig or feather into an animal's anus and move it back and forth (for amusement). posi hishão.

to insert a long, thin object into an orifice to clean it. hishão.

to be somewhat vast or spacious, to extend over a fairly large area. fhauhuhu.

to be angry. maanau.

guardar algo cubierto, conservar debajo de. rehami.

while they were holding Hokotoyoma, they were scraping his skin. hokotoyoma a huwepipou tehe, a hoãpii re kukeiwei (mit.

1. To hold, immobilize (with the hand). 2. To possess hekura inside the chest (shaman).. huwepou.

piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

piled up, stacked up (firewood). yototamama.

when it is cut, it is extremely tough and viscous (the flesh of the disease demon). the ki pata hãnimou yoripi yihitiwe no kirii (cha.

to cut, to split into several pieces. hãnii.

bone tip for arrows. namopi.

I am. mi hino.

to be. hino.

there is a smell of váquiros. ware ke ki ni waua.

to be present (smell). waua.

you will get under his back without him noticing. pei ke fumapi hami wa kuprou fãthoowe.

under his back. fãthoowe.

the bats hang upside down. hewe pe mi wereo.

to hang upside down briefly. weretou.

come to get us. wamare ta koreyo.

they began to detest us. wamare nohi wãrirema.

us. wamare.

where the mountain ridge is straight. fririhiope.

to have back pain (lit. fpeishoku iwapi.

to break the kidneys with the teeth (animal). fpoushoku wahekiprai.

back. fpeishoku.

la nutria se desplazaba (hacia ellos), estirando el cuello en algunos sitios (por encima del agua). wãi katiatarou ha kooimani.

to move stretching the neck. katiatarou.

it was because I defended myself alone that I am still alive. kamiye re ya nohi ha peyeoni ya rii t e m i.

to defend oneself, to protect oneself. peyeo.

The child climbed the tree and shook a branch. ihiru ke a wai ha torekuni, hii poko raekama.

to shake. raeke.

then, what is happening to them (where they are). weti naha pei wamaki kuaai kupiyewe.

to be in a certain state in a place different from the place of utterance. piyewe.

the nearby song of the paujiles is heard and also it can be The word 'paruri' in Yanomami means 'gallineta (type of bird)'. ei paruri ke pe miã pata ahetewe totihiwe.

paujil (bird species). paruri.

to scratch oneself repeatedly. tikokorariyo.

to reach the summit one after the other. matotopraai.

to be numb due to the effect of a magic substance. ya imiki puhi no tawemi.

to be numb, insensible (part of the body). puhi no ta.

that which can be. hãhimamou.

to offer several parts; to divide, separate into several parts (with plural object). shekereakei.

to be in a hurry. wehererama.

Follow the path. Noshi hari hi kuma.

to follow a path. noshi hari.

they had set out on the path, and it was then that Hoo fell in front of him. the pe ha huoproherini, hoo ke pe keoprou mi paoma.

a supernatural being that lurks in the forest, taking the appearance of a close relative to lure victims. foo.

to glue, stick, attach (two objects). sutiprou.

after having removed the banana shoots, he smoothed the ground (to conceal his theft). kuratha si kararu ha thomireni, e naha re e the tãihiwe thaa ha totihiarini.

smooth. thomireni.

where is it said to be (on the ground). weti the re kure hami the hoã praa.

is said to be. praa.

to put on a belt. tikrohoai.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall seriously ill. parohoai.

if they kill you in a different region from the one we live in, I will not cry for you. shomi ke the urihi hami wa thapraretayomahe, pe no miã pou mai ke the.

if they kill you in a different region from the one we live in, I will not cry for you. thapraretayomahe.

Monkey's tail: wito : merey. wisha shina: wito : merey.

monkey. wito.

null. tainama.

I possess a bow smeared with resin that is leaning (against something), that is what I say frankly, without hesitation. ipa the nahi sipo tapitapipi ithãpraa hea, ya kuu katitou waikiwe.

to say frankly, without hesitation. katitou.

your blood will flow in streams. tu sangre manará a chorros.

will flow. manará.

to embrace, to hug. hãyoko.

to introduce by force (perfective, plural object). kiririakei.

cross it around my chest (= give me a necklace). weti ipa ke ki ta yakirapari.

to carry crossed over the chest (a cotton thread or bead necklace). yakirapou.

it took us a long time to climb the last part of the trail and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain. hesikaai.

to those bundles of arrow canes, put feathers on them so that they become arrows, and give them to me (placing them on the ground). fei ke siki re shororimore, wama e ki fe fa okãni, ke ki ta pramahe.

these bundles of arrow canes that sprout profusely. kihi siki re shororimore.

bundles of arrow canes. shororimore.

line up here. heyeha ke wamaki ha masisoni.

to line up, to align. itou.

to be hungry. suhãreãmi.

I will give it to him/her. ya e hipeape.

to give (it/him/her). hipeape.

to consume gradually in successive moments. watheprai.

the chain vine is concave (actually it is sinuous). rasirasi thotho a mi hopokowe.

1. to become concave (wall); to form a concavity (surface) 2. to make a wall concave; to hollow out the fruit of a cucurbit to make a container or gourd. hopokoai.

they shot numerous arrows at a fat tapir in a pond. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, wawewawe praope ha.

to shoot numerous bamboo-tipped arrows repeatedly. shekishekiprao.

(verb root related to . tihiye-.

to beautify; to make an animal beautiful by feeding it well. riyeheamai.

the cord of his hammock was about to break. pei pera the peki thapi fetii puﬁo yaro.

to carry, transport. pera.

to be green/unripe, to become green. riyeai.

I descended the slope. ya mi weteherima.

to slide down an inclined plane. weterayou.

to get a cough, to catch a cold. thokopiprou.

the people (the men and women, the human beings) passed one after the other, clinging to the floating trees. pe hami yãnomãmi the pe yetekeo tehe the pe hayupraama.

to pass in front of. hayua.

to rot, to decompose in a specific place. ruthakei.

he possesses plantations and that is how he feeds himself. e naha re theka pe ha thaponi pe wãri iyai no thai.

possess, have. thapou.

to force something in, to slide something between the skin and the loincloth (to hide it, to transport it). hikokei.

to have already finished doing something. romirãyou.

I approached a place where there was a wasp nest, they emerged suddenly from the nest and I started running. ya re ikuowei hami kopina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

a place. ikuowei.

you are the one who has forced them to walk quickly, it is because of you that they are walking so fast. kaheni ke wa pe wãri hore ha hushushuponi, wa pe kãi wãri hore ropaai ma re kui.

to force to walk quickly. hushushu.

perfective of the inchoative form (to start walking through the forest). yashokorayou.

to jump from an elevated place to another, to jump from one tree trunk to another. yutuprao.

I got lost following the path. pei yo ha ya yakerayoma.

to get lost. yakerayoma.

as they were impure (= incestuous) they all climbed (the posts that support the dwelling). pe no kirihiwe ha pe komi re tukeiwei (mit.

to be repugnant, dreadful, horrendous; to be impure, dirty, incestuous. no kirihiwe.

to divide into several parts. shetekerarei.

the sloth's hair is very resistant (it is difficult to break). ihama upe tihekiomi.

not to break, to be resistant. tihekiomi.

to take each other by the arm. iri misi ipihi.

to take by the arm. ipihi.

Remove the strings from their bows. hãto ke nahi pe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

to remove the string from a bow (perfective, plural object). hayurarei.

I put a cover on the pot. to utami ya si ka he raai.

to cover a hole, obstruct an exit. popohoponer.

they are now constantly alert and will not stop moving in two parallel groups. pe wãri moyawerayou ke a kuhe, pe wãri poaai kuyeheo mai ke the.

to move in two parallel groups. poarayou.

to dry up, evaporate (perfective form). weherayou.

Gather the leaves, we will spread them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to spread, extend. patheri.

I will make a cotton ball and take it, you will ask for it. ya nathe fa thaprarini, ya nathe kãi fa yaﬁrini, wa nakouwe.

cotton ball. thaprarini.

to imitate (once) the cry of an animal to attract it. fãshãmi.

I keep having the urge to fart. ya shiã iheihemou.

to have the urge to fart. shiã.

the very old man, who had been lying for a long time in a hammock hung between two trees, began to bite the shosho fruit. pata totihiwe a re hakokotionowei, shosho mo wayoai re kukeiwei.

to hang or have hung a hammock in the open air; in an antithesis or joking manner: to live in the collective house. hakokoo.

the raw caterpillars were (arranged) above, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached the bottom (of the package). heaka ha kasha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to be full to the brim, to be about to overflow (for a watercourse); to reach a certain limit (for an object). manikipraw.

they proliferated (we realized afterwards). pe the pe pararayou no kureshi.

I had left the arrow at home and the women broke it in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

to do something without realizing it. RVpereshi.

these arrow canes that sprout profusely, I go to gather them (to make arrows). k ihi siki re shororimore, ya ki rii teaprai kutaeni.

to sprout well, to grow vigorously (plant). shororimou.

to be crowded (durative aspect). hithokou.

to feel fatigued (in a general way and without a specific reason); to feel tired. wãrihipariyo.

extend, stretch out a finger. fi m ihena kashesheai.

bend a finger. imihena shãkoãi.

fingers of a hand. fimihenaki.

I took out the fish from the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

I took out the fish from the canoe. hashiriakema.

if they kill you here (and not elsewhere), then I will grieve and take your quiver (lit. mori eyeha ke wa hore thaprai totihikemahe, pei ya wãri hore kuaprarou, pe thorapi ha yehireni ke.

quiver made from bamboo. totihikemahe.

you (pl. wamaki mi waitheri nonoomi.

to be a coward. nonopraomi.

we are friends (us and them). nohi ke yamaki: somos amigos (nosotros y ellos).

(upriver dialect form of . nohi.

la diadema y el algodón rojo la ponían espléndida. mathono peni the no aimoma.

splendid, magnificent. mathono.

speech of upriver. huroko.

movement regularly ascending of someone who is swinging. nonohononohomou.

they (the two) took her, placed themselves on each side and slowly brought her to solid ground. a re huwepireiwei, ke kipi mi therehetariyowei, opi a kãi re washiripikeiwei.

to surround, to encircle (someone or something). huwepireiwei.

to persist, to insist, to do something overcoming an obstacle or ignoring a contrary warning. yatirayou.

Onom. for the sound of thunder cracking. tãi!.

he grabbed the fire, but did not rise (= but did not manage to rise). wake teai ma kui a isipronomi (mit.

not to rise, not to grow, not to sprout (a plant). isipronomi.

to make deep, to deepen (a cavity). koeheprou.

because I am someone who has killed. watoshe tuyetimi ya kutaeni.

to have killed, to be someone who kills. watoshe tuyetimi.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

others were floating, stiff, on the water surface (myth). yaioma (mit.

to float, to wade, to walk through water. karoro.

when the fire blazed, he put logs on top. koa wake parai tehe ãshoku makekea re mahireiwei.

he put logs on top. mahireiwei.

The woman took two bananas at once, one for her and one for her child. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru oshe pe ma kui riha.

to take, give or receive two objects at once. uãi.

yo lavo la ropa. iro ya siki yaruu.

to wash, to purify. yaruu.

to take several parts. hakarorarei.

again the woman described a curve then. suwe e naha ke a tihiyea kuprou ha koroni.

then. koroni.

I will scratch you a lot. pe iprushimararei.

to scratch or claw someone. iprushiamai.

to put the head. pasuo.

object cut into several pieces with the teeth. wetima.

he lives with the "Whites" and shares their food, surely his tongue has become numb (= he does not know how to assert his rights, he does not know how to express himself). nape a re periope, a ni riape ha, aka wãri moyepiai ke the.

come up, come up, come eat apia fruits with us. tupo, tupo, apia ke ki ta riayo.

to share food with someone, to participate with others in taking hallucinogens. riape.

I will go to the mountain and eat a lot of nai flowers again. ora hami ke ya ha kuroherini nai ke ya wai koope, kahiki yakei ayapoi.

to eat a lot of something. kuroherini.

nos acercamos y bajamos al río. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

perfectivo de prape en presencia de un verbo intransitivo o en la voz media. *propariyo.

the two shapono are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the Capuchin monkey ancestors were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to have been placed or to have placed oneself one next to the other (low and rounded objects). tipetekei.

to blacken the body completely by rubbing it with hands coated in dye. hipio.

to blacken the body completely by rubbing it with hands coated in dye. hipio.

he is angry. kothãrãwe katosihi.

to be angry. kothãrãwe.

the path forks. yo shererea.

1. to divide, separate, move away from others temporarily to live apart, definitively separate from the community to go live elsewhere 2. to divide, separate; to take a part from a whole. shekere.

they will dream, they will have premonitions. pe wãri maharimope, pe wãri thapimope.

to dream, to have a premonitory dream. thapimomai.

larva of a beetle; Rhynchophorus palmarum (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). It is a thick, edible worm found in the rotting stem of coroba and moriche palms. Sometimes the palms are cut down to later collect the larvae. When one has a cavity, it is said: ouni yare naki wai (lit.: a worm or u of the palm is eating my tooth).. potimari.

to be dry and hard locally. yihitia.

due to the fact that from the beginning he could not resist (lit. the naiki he hore tiraprou ha maoni, naiki yakeamai ha shoataruni (mit. : renounce) his cannibalistic desire, it persisted. ).

to resist. yakeamai.

he is afraid. ihiru yimothaki.

to be afraid. yimothaki.

to carry a child on one. ãyorimarei.

to cause to crumble or pulverize (earth). waruhamai.

keep on guard. pe ta moyawepraru.

to be on guard, to be vigilant. moyawepraru.

Translation:. kuhãwe natosi.

corn germ. natosi.

to make small, to diminish. wakewemi.

to become dented or concave (in one place). wãuku.

to have been damaged, crushed (extremity of a long object). thekeherayou.

firewood. ãkosho.

Horonãmi who was lost found Cachicamo. horonãmi a mohoru ha kuparuni, moro a tararema (mit.

to lose, to misplace. hoya.

they gathered/collected perhaps a package of magical substances. heri pe hãro norãmi hokeremahe.

they gathered/collected. hokeremahe.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to divide something into pieces by pulling in opposite directions with the teeth and fingers. wakokai.

alone (person only). sheketeprou.

activities. actividades.

to have been deepened, to have been made deeper. koeheã.

to cool down, to make cool. ruwemo.

I have the urge to urinate. ya niaasi ihe.

to have the urge to urinate. niaasi.

to renounce an aggression or revenge. puhi asimorayou.

to renounce an aggression or revenge. asimorayou.

there are muddy grounds, do not approach. heãro wamaki ahetou mai.

hang your hammock below your husband's. pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokorei.

muddy ground in which one sinks. heãro.

1. To advance for a moment (animal). 2. To move briefly crawling (small child).. tereketou.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm using two crossed poles. hãiki.

I will not go to look at your small banana plant anymore. kuratha si wai mii mai ke the.

to look at. mii.

to let die. tokumarei.

to become a viscous mass due to heat, as happens when burning plastic or certain resins (e.g. mai koko). yorikirayou.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

honey. shapomi.

apresúrense a quemar su cabeza cuando yo se la haya cortado. pei ya he wãri ha pahetireni, he wãri yaa ta haipahe she.

head. haipahe.

Yotenama broke the spine of the bigger boys. yotenamani pe re mãrãnãpiwei pe mi kreama.

broke the spine of. yotenamani.

magical substance. koreshe.

small frog (unidentified). pretipretimi.

to knead the cassava flour so that some liquid remains inside it. urereai.

housefly. moo.

to warm myself. elo.

la mezcla de agua y miel está (demasiado) espesa. puu upe mi hute.

ser potente (alucinógeno). wayu mi hute.

to thicken (liquid); to become darker (dye); to ripen (fruit). mi hute.

to place long objects next to each other (durative). waririmai.

to be doing it (painting a curved line on the face). hiporoshimou.

tomorrow I will work in the fields (downriver). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

downriver, downstream. -imakiri.

he returned to sit down on the path. pei yo hami a wãri roo kootayoma.

sat down on the path. kootayoma.

to delirate, to speak incoherently. aka porepiai.

he has been gone for a long time. yetu ha a ayoherima.

he/she/it has gone away. ayatariyo.

they draw intersecting lines. shereka a yahecruzan.

to cross, to cut transversely; to draw intersecting lines. yahecruzan.

calabash tree; Crescentia amazonica (Bignoniaceae). totumo.

¿Vendrás mañana con nosotros. —henaha wa huu nareope.

no. nareope?.

large feline (unidentified animal). wãshãema.

slightly curved. wãhetãi.

give me a machete. ipa namo ta totopa.

give me. totopa.

to bend, to fold. hithothe.

to rub with the fingertips to clean. horokoo.

snore. hohoruã.

frog. boans.

we will arrive now at the place called Kãmohãwe (downriver). kãmohãwe ha hei tehe pemaki kuaai shoaparekirio.

we will arrive. shoaparekirio.

to start closing a basket by bringing the opposite edges together and tying them. itutuprai.

to be hungry. shonama.

we will widen the hole. yama theka premape.

to make large, to fabricate large an object; to enlarge, to widen (a cavity). premape.

to make a house: to make the roof. waruku 1 v.

to make. dibu-.

to add salt. mositimai.

mientras él estaba colgado cabeza abajo de un algarrobo, Mujer-oso hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas alrededor de la plaza central. ãro kohi ha a mi wereo tehe, teperiyoma a rii tiwaroa shoarayoma (mit.

curve. tiwaro.

to start having a runny nose. hushihipiai.

to loosen, to become loose, to tie a loose knot. prohororo.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma (mit.

to have sleepiness for a moment, to always feel sleepy. maharishitou.

divididive montañero tree (Cassia multijuga). paokaihiti.

when we had left the palm grove behind, we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to leave a place behind, go further than. parokuni.

(he/she) spit once. kahu upe keyekei.

to spit once. kahu upe keye.

to tap with the tip of an object, to knock on a door once. krookokei.

they piled up banana shoots on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha kuratha si pe hirapraai yaiomahe (mit.

they piled up firewood at the entrance of the burrow. pei pekapi kasi ha koã ãsho hirapraai re kukeiwehei (mit.

to pile up, to group together, to gather. hirapraai.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not withstand such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to fight. etiayou.

a whistling call was heard. the pe husi heã petariyo k u r e i.

whistling language. paruu.

do it without wasting an instant. the ta thaa moyaweaprara.

as they had harvested honey without wasting time, we drank it (mixed with water, as a drink). puu u pe thaa ha moyaweapotuheni, yama u pe koarar e m a.

to do quickly, to do without wasting time. moyaweaprarama.

the wood is dry. koã ãsho washitiwe.

to be completely dry, to stop being flooded (terrain). washitiwe.

it is not visible. a taproimi.

not visible, cannot be seen. proãproãmi.

to introduce by force. kiririkei.

he/she/it is dead. a waiyorayoma.

is dead. waiyorayoma.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

to destroy, to damage. wariti.

we, the hekura dye, intend to go dance near you. wayore yama nou kãi niya re tirurorayoi.

hekura dye. wayore.

in each place, they renounced. the pe tiraatarama.

indicates the repetition of the same event in different places (spatial discontinuity), whether it is carried out by the same actor moving from one place to another, or by different actors situated in different places, or simply a little dispersed (spatial discontinuity). -atara-.

when one feels forced to lie down (due to the effect of hallucinogens), the posts that support the roof start to sway. the pe peritamai tehe, hãto ke nahi mohe pe hotehotemou.

to oscillate or sway due to the effect of wind; to have the impression that objects are swaying when one is under the effect of a hallucinogen. peritamai.

he broke an ant nest with his hands and brought it (near his temporary shelter). konakona pe pesi pata ha keretuni, pe pesi praa shoakeyoruma.

ant. konakona.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. iroroo.

they began to surround us. yamareki he hãyopraremahe.

they began to surround us. hãyopraremahe.

to place an object below another, to put below. pepikei.

I live upriver. ya peria oraa.

we went down to the water a little farther upriver. yamaki ithoa orahakema.

to be upriver; to be at the front of a canoe. ihete.

you, the young ones, go and ambush at the paths (= go and lie in wait at the edges of the paths, in case the enemies arrive). ihiru pe, pei yoka pe hami the ta iyoa ayaapotuhe.

to ambush, to lie in wait. ayaapotuhe.

the stream is narrow. u makosi.

the people upriver use such narrow loincloths that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

narrow, tight. makosi.

he started by scratching his leg. pei matha ha the hapa shoreretarema.

he started scratching his leg. shoreretarema.

to have a drawing on the face that starts from the corner of the lips and forms a semicircle that culminates on the forehead. fhuko iporoshio.

the skin of the forehead. huko siki.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. fhuko siki presheshewe.

to raise the eyebrows wrinkling the forehead to show agreement. fhuko siki ririmou.

forehead. fhuko.

to fabricate an object such that one side is higher than the other (perfective aspect). werehemakei.

the man is angry. warapa kohirimi ke ki.

to be angry. kohirimi.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not endure such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to shoot arrows at each other. yoayou.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to redden slightly, to become reddish. teãy.

the head of the jaguar. ncharon.

black caracara (bird species). Daptrius ater.

te meteré (lit. hei motoreriwe a re perire ha pe moithãpari, pe ithãpari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. te Estaré) en el agua donde vive el demonio de los remolinos, allí te pondré. ).

Remolino, torbellino. motoheri.

I only managed to graze the tapirs (with the arrows I shot at them). ware ya pe shiro si tikekerarema.

I only managed to graze the tapirs (with the arrows I shot at them). tikekerarema.

it is here where the disease demon has been fastened (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye.

to tie tightly, to fasten firmly. atete.

fish. cha-.

the end of the stick is twisted several times. the hi ora toyekewe.

completely twisted or bent; twisted in several places. toyekewe.

eran susurros. mahanini the ã kuoma.

whisper. hanono.

when I fell again after jumping over a water hole, I stepped on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

depression or hole in the ground where rainwater accumulates. katikir.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just gone through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

to constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole). ayaprariyo.

se pintó la cara con onoto perfumado. hosho u peni a mi rii yãprãrema.

tree. nouhi.

he/she died. a nohi mohoturayoma.

he/she died. mohoturayoma.

they will not kill me. yare poko teai mai ke the.

1. To be sick; to be beaten, killed (they killed him). 2. To feel tiredness in the arm when carrying a heavy load. 3. To bite the hook and pull the fishing line (fish).. tishako.

path opened by pushing aside vegetation with the foot. kakea.

to cut with the hand the branches covered with leaves that close the exit of a dwelling. fpeki thaki yãprãi.

to cut with the hand the branches covered with leaves that close the exit of a dwelling. yãprãi.

to be placed in parallel (next to each other or on top of each other). werereai.

to raise a hanging hammock that is too low by running the rope along the post to which it is tied (without untying the knot). hokokokei.

I brought all the ones I needed. ya the hiki ma re oa waide.

to bring. waide.

to become flat, horizontal (the end of an elongated object, especially a stick or piece of wood). tatahaai.

lie down for a moment. a ta peritaiku.

lie down for a moment. peritaiku.

to start to speak calmly (after being angry). wapeprai.

I have opened the path there (going around the obstacle). iha pei ya mayo pahetia ãyoã shoareherima.

Jaguar took another path and made a long detour. ãyoyo shomi ke yoka ha ira ke a pata ãyoãtaroma.

to go around, to bypass, to make a detour. yo.

in dreams, to dream about something. fmahari ha.

to dream without ceasing (southern Orinoco dialect). fmaharimou yashushou.

to dream, to have a nightmare. fmahari.

he destroyed the loins of all the children. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

he destroyed them all. haikirarema.

to have memory lapses (habitually). mratamratawe.

to install one. pepimokei.

take down your hammocks (get ready to leave), you know well that they invite us (to enter their house). pe ta shurukou ta haitaru, pemareki nakapou ke ma re kuhei ke.

us (inclusive, object). pemareki.

when they make the novices inhale pore henaki (at the time of their initiation), they become capable of regurgitating the plant during a shamanic session. pore henakini yãnowãmi wa the he horai kukema, pe henaki pehi thao.

magical substance. yãnowãmi.

1. to scrape with the teeth the soft pulp of a fruit (to eat it). 2. to scrape with the teeth.. wãhehe.

to partially roll up, to fold once (the edge of an object). wapure.

they slept during the night and felt well, they had already dreamed. titi ha pe ha mioni the pe totihorayoma, pe the pe maharimou waikioma.

to dream without ceasing (southern Orinoco dialect). fmaharimou yashushou.

to dream; to have a nightmare. fmaharimou.

to reach an excessively ripe state. poshoropiãi.

he offered him a recipient filled with plantain. poreaweni tate u pe ithãkema.

to offer. poreaweni.

he had so much sadness that he quickly returned to the region (inhabited by his parents). yetu the urihi aheteai re korãyouwei, puhipuhipeni.

Sadness, grief; restlessness. puhipuhipe.

very deep place of a river where fish seek refuge during the dry season, when the water level is very low. fyuri ke ki mathopi.

deep place. mathopi.

stole (perfective). thomimorãyou.

grew (plants, in the garden); plural object. patarayou.

while Oso hormiguero danced around behind, the woman returned directly to her house. teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe poreporeriyoma a katitia re korayoheriiwei.

she returned directly. poreporeriyoma.

I placed sticks under the ugly buttocks of the (unborn) child, and Rumirumiyoma wove a basket to enclose it (= I killed the fetus in the mother's womb). kana ke hiki ha ihiru ya posi wãritiwe romaparei kurei, rumirumiyoma ihiru pei ke a pesi ha tiyeaprani (cha.

associated with cloudy weather and rain; she is the mother-in-law of Titiri, the demon of the night. tiyeaprani.

the cat of mottled snout. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

spotted, mottled. hayapishi.

and this rock oscillated (between their hands). pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma.

oscillate. keaprarou.

a mosquito stung me. ukushini yare hiirema.

to sting. picahihuprou.

they were cooking váquiros when suddenly another herd approached. ware pe hariihe tehe, ai ke the pe re ikutakeiwei.

they were (still) cooking váquiros, when another herd approached; I was heading to a place where there were numerous tembladores. ikutakeiwei.

I have itching on my lip. ya kasiki shihitikema.

to have itching (in a precise location). shihitikei.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. hãthoreni.

to palpate, to crush with fingertips. hutikio.

to palpate, to crush with fingertips. hutiki.

to be always eating, to consume the ashes of a deceased person (plural subject). iyaoprou.

to rise up momentarily above. parotou.

to form a block. hikiniprou.

to have scratched with the nails the red spots left by gnats, to have had this done by someone else. tisika no.

to scratch with the nails to remove the red spots caused by gnats. tisikai.

to receive something on the head. he shepariyo.

to receive something on the head. shepariyo.

the gallineta (bird) took flight and the spirits went away. hãshimori a ha yepraruni porepore pe kooprou ha kuparuni.

to fly away, to take flight. yepraruni.

you will crouch down under him (under the hammock where he is lying). kahe pei ke pehithepi wãri ha a ta yereiku.

to crouch or squat down under something. pehithepi.

calm down. a ta yãnikitaru.

to calm down, become tranquil, stop being agitated. yãniki.

they say that you are an infallible shooter and expect your intervention. wa nihite wãhã ha hirapoheni, wa puhurai kupiyehei.

your intervention. kupiyehei.

to become flexible. uhurupiprou.

I will cause the metamorphosis of your head. pe he shi wãrihipramai (mit.

to cause a transformation, a metamorphosis; to generate a change of nature. shi wãrihipramai.

Zool. ya the ereZool. , bird, yellow-tufted woodpecker; I place them side by side. , ave, carpintero real pico amarillo; Camk e k e i: yo los pongo uno al lado del otro.

to lie down side by side, to place two elongated objects side by side. yote.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long line that extends. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

straight mountain range (without ups and downs). fthe matoto fririhiã.

to move in a line, to hang a hammock, to be taut. fririhi.

parts. partes.

to be hard, solid, firm. rohotha.

Dry creek. hashiCaño seco.

The woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now (myth). mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma (mit.

to dry up. hashitiai.

they feared a tobacco theft. pee nahe pe nohi horihipomahe.

to feel apprehension (for another person); to fear a theft. horihipomahe.

the Yãnomãmi are not afraid to face arrows (ceremonial dialogue). yãnoãmi pe pe pufi no wãri shesensaripi perihiwe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to readily engage in violence, to go to war. puhipe tharehe.

when we get tired of living in the forest we return to the communal dwelling. yamaki periai ha mohipraruni yamaki kooma.

those who live (plural subject, dispersed). periprawe.

1. To abandon the communal dwelling to live temporarily elsewhere (in a camp in the forest, at an ally. peri.

he took down the basket abruptly and carried the living child in it. wii ke a pata ha hayutareni, ai ke a temi re titireheriiwei.

to carry (an object contained within another). ftitireherii.

erekou: the way spiders move. erekou: modo de locomoción de las arañas. wariomi koheshiki erekou: the wariomi koheshi spiders move. wariomi koheshiki erekou: las arañas wariomi koheshi se desplazan.

to climb trees by hugging the trunk with arms and legs. ereke.

it is said that they were accompanied back by the people of Shashanawe. shashanawe theri peni pe ãhã peratayomahe.

they were accompanied back. peratayomahe.

rope. mekate.

to be ugly, to be in bad condition. wãnihita.

(he) sat with his legs spread apart. kumãrãroriweni irariwe ke yakorotou.

to sit with legs spread apart. yakorotou.

to become less rigid, to wrinkle due to the effect of the sun (tobacco leaf). yaharokoprou.

to place a limit on a surface, to limit. tiroroai.

indentation left by the chigger after removing it from the skin. hihu na wãno ka.

there where they had burned the jaguar's head, in the place where there was a mark on the ground, guamo chivo trees grew. ira ke he yapopehe ha, he wãno ka ha, kasha ke nahi hai ha kuparuni (mit.

mark, indentation left by an object after it has been removed. yapopehe.

I put the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

food that is found inside a deep container. meun.

to go live at a distance from others or from the communal dwelling. asiprou.

small bird. tehitehi.

when you open us (to harvest our honey), you will really get tired (we are so numerous). yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope.

to open a hollow object to access the interior. pashai.

some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pata prariroma (mit.

falling one by one, shedding (bird), scattering (fruits, flowers, etc.). pratheciéndose.

bark of a tree that previously came off easily. wariprou.

he suddenly appeared in the dwelling. yahi hami a shirimoma.

dwelling, house, home. shirimoma.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for their house then. kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe.

inhale hallucinogens (perfective). epenamorayou.

they danced one after the other and, when they finished, night fell. the pe ha praitaaruni, the pe ha prairini the mi titiray o m a.

they danced one after the other. praitaaruni.

to call a young boy moka, to address him using that term of kinship. mokamou.

banana plant about to flower. fkuratha si moko mata.

term of kinship. moka.

to whistle to call someone, whistling while modulating the name, nickname or kinship term of the person being called. husi komi.

brother-in-law, behave well, you do not sit properly, and the paths of the hekura do not reach you. shoriwe a ta totihiparu she, wa rea toami yaiwe, pei yoka he re tatokai tharei (cha.

to reach, to arrive at. tatokai.

constru1 vb. oi wa the wãri ha yu yotohariprarini, a wãri ta poprari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. intr. ).

suffer the effects of a hallucinogen or illness. yotancia.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to curve, to bend into an arc shape. payokai.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

to scratch, graze, superficially hit (when shooting an arrow). tiheheai.

he slid his hand along the strings of the hammock. pei re the pe peki hami imiki waroroataroma.

to slide one. waroroataroma.

encarámense (sobre la plataforma) uno al lado del otro. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

Horonami se detuvo de inmediato y aguzó el oído. horonami yimika taa kãi upraa ha shoaikuni.

one next to the other, side by side. shoaikuni.

to get cold, to become frozen. preyurapiai.

to get cold, to become frozen. preyurapiai.

those bamboos inclined, I will cut them to make bamboo tips, with which I will inflict wounds. hei sikoropirimi ki re raipe ya rii ha hãithoreni, ya iye pe ka ha tharini.

to inflict wounds, to injure. tharini.

he traced a sinuous line (on his forehead) and immediately set out for the shapono. the mi hore ha tikekeikuni yetu the wãri ha ikutaikuni, shapono hami.

to trace a sinuous line (on the forehead). tikekeikuni.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

pile up. apilaré.

stretch the threads of a new cotton hammock, or of a hammock. paokoprai.

go to the forest and hurry to grow. urihi hami ke wa ha huaani a ta yawea hairi.

to grow, to raise (a child, a pet). yaweprou.

the noise moves away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to become barely perceptible to the senses (hearing, sight, taste). manashiai.

to help her. payeri.

to sharpen the point of something. hiroroai.

to have the habit of docking the canoe at a certain place. katipraai.

they lit a big fire to illuminate Titiri. pe wake pata piyeamai ha kuparuheni, titiri ke a hisikai ha kuparuheni (mit.

to illuminate something (with a flame, glowing embers, or a torch). hisikai.

to become constipated (terminative aspect). hokoprou.

fishing line, fishing cord. fmatiriawe ãsitha, uhea ãsitha.

to fish with a fishing line (jokingly). fmatiriawe kãpou.

fishing line, cord. fmatiriawe.

to be angry. prakehai.

to call each other. nakayou.

Aparecido felt fear and was startled. pore ke a ha kiriraruni a ãtiprariyoma (mit.

to startle, to cause a fright. kiri*pramai.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

to pronounce the invitation speech during a feast, or to respond to it. teshemomo.

They say you are an infallible shooter and they expect your intervention. wa nihite wãhã ha hirapoheni, wa puhurai kupiyehei.

1. To count on someone. puhurai.

it becomes moldy. mishi rutheai.

it has become moldy. mishi rutherariyo.

to become moldy. mishi ruthe.

to become extensive. praukuprou.

in the past the Yanomami did not have banana passionfruit plants. hapa yãnomãmi peni yahatotorimi pe thaponomi.

banana passionfruit. yahatotorimi.

he was wearing cotinga blue feather earrings (lit. heimi siki reikimapoma.

it is in that direction where a small path (that leads into this larger one we are on) is found. ihi the re kure hami yo wai reikia kure.

to slide, to dangle, to hang. rei.

to cause muscle aches or cramps. hayeheripramarei.

to stick, fix against. sutiai.

to receive something divided in that way. wakokopei.

he/she peeked. mi yehekei.

don't look at others while hiding. a mi yeheatihe.

to peek, to spy, to observe stealthily. yehekei.

a woman had her head cut off, and her head rolled and followed her husband everywhere. suwe ke the he hãniprou ha kuparuni, pe heãropi ke ihami pei ke the he pruruu nosi yauai ha yaioni.

to cut one. hãniprou.

to become bruised or battered. taoko.

the little one was stuck near a shallow burrow. m ochicamo pequeño estaba atascado cerca de una madriguera poco profunda.

small, little. ochicamo.

tree. ãmohi.

palm cut into strips to make a fire fan. shuhema mishiki.

he took the basket fibers and started weaving. yorofi ke mishiki re furihireiwei, e the tiyema.

material ready to be woven. mishiki.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than; to place closer to a certain limit. hawemakei.

two beautiful women have just arrived at the house. riyehewe ke kipi suwe kopei kuhe.

the high tobacco leaves are beautiful and abundant. hisihisi pee re nahe pata riyehewe yorukou thare.

beautiful, pretty, splendid. riyeheprawe.

to finish, exhaust. wathe.

taxonomic classifier. hiyomãri.

it is nothing other than a pelt of a zorro guache (a type of fox), however its head (its upper extremity) has a pretty notch. yarushe pei si ma kui wa si he pata yakatowe ta toprapariyohani.

round object whose upper part has a more or less concave incision (a groove, a notch) that divides it into two more or less equal and regular areas. yakatowe.

she will sit here again. a roa koãhãperei.

she will sit here again. koãhãperei.

to mix with people from another community. tikurua.

to get cut, scratched, marked. si yakekeo.

mark, cut, scratch. lon-.

to be about to have one. oromashipramou.

to let something smell bad (through negligence). wãriãmãi.

he untied his hammock again and hung it somewhere else. kihami peki hirihiã ha koikuni.

to fix a loose tie between two points; to hang a hammock. fririhikei.

when the novices are made to inhale the pore henakini plant (at the time of their initiation), they become able to regurgitate the plant during a shamanic session. pore henakini yãnowãmi wa the he horai kukema, pe henaki pehi thao.

magical plant substance. henakini.

to stay for a long time with people from other communities. ohotio.

you will not retain them. kafeni wa wã titipou mrai ke the.

retain, remember. titiãi.

give me a bamboo tip, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to receive from someone an object that they have obtained from another. torepei.

to have a swollen, hard and painful stomach. shuwe.

the people of the red partridges in turn smeared themselves with the dye, and also painted the edges of their eyes and their feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

the two little partridges picked up a caterpillar hardened and deformed by cooking. pokorari ke kilarga kasha ke a ripi prithothowe re hokepirei.

a type of bird (possibly a partridge). pokorari.

to become downy (human), to become tomentose (plant). shipeii.

1. hitikiprai : 1. To crush termites and stir them using a forked branch that is rolled between the palms of the hands. Aplastar cambures y removerlos utilizando una rama con horquetas múltiples que se rueda entre la palma de las manos.

to crush and stir. hitikiprai.

to hang upside down, like a sloth or a spider from its web. haharamayethawe.

to place objects on top (plural objects). heakaprawe.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yaiopereshi.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. ropakeiwei.

to start tying/attaching something with a fairly long rope. preyukuprai.

to be affected by a supernatural being or a malefic substance. yokekerariyo.

to grow (human), to make an arrow slightly longer than usual. tirehou.

we quickly reached land one after the other. rope yamaki hashiripraama.

to reach land one after the other quickly. hashiripraama.

he approached them, he spoke to them, they recognized him, they were afraid. a ha tikukutoni, a ha hamorioni, the pe horiã ha hititirarini, the pe hoketamama.

to approach, to get close. tikukutoni.

to be planted vertically in the ground (an elongated object). estar plantado verticalmente en el suelo (un objeto alargado).

planted. plantado.

I won't give it without receiving anything in return, prepare cotton yarn and you will get it. shiroko ha mai ke, shinari wama uko pe ha thararini wama the pe rurayorupe.

we go to the forest without taking anything (lit. shiroko tutuai totihio kuperei.

to take something without giving anything in return; to be empty (flashlight without batteries); to return empty-handed (from hunting or fishing). thararini.

to graze, to scrape. tiki.

a swamp, a lagoon. pe mo un pantano, una laguna.

swamp, lagoon. pe mo.

(Ellos) fueron a coger ajíes. huko mo co a coger ajíes.

Mientras las desenterraban, las batatas cantaban como tucanes. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe, huko mo pe mayepimowa pu; tahiapi a ta hukepa, ya the ta wapa.

Coger, arrancar, cosechar un fruto. yoinc.

when Siroromi got up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

to hold someone immobilized between the thighs. hututurei.

(habla de río arriba. prukunama ãsi.

a type of tree or plant. prukunama.

his father has given it to him. pe hiini a hipekema.

I call him father (= he is a classificatory father for me). kama ke iha ya hiimou.

father, elder male relative in direct line. imou.

when they discover a giant cachicamo, they will asphyxiate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

to be blown away by the wind or an air current. yarerai.

he was lying (unconscious) on the ground, he got up again and climbed (the tree). a pratioma, hoketou re korayonowei, a tuoma (mit.

he got up again and climbed (the tree). korayonowei.

Gather the leaves, we will scatter them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, to spread out. patherikei.

to climb up a tree to perch on a branch. tikepeherayou.

the ashes were not at all recent, they were really cold. yupu the ushi pe no weyahapimi, the ushi pe ahi totihiwe.

your dog (during a wayamu) (lit. fyupuhe ushi kasi re miiwei.

ashes. yupu ushi.

he stopped when he was very close (to him). prake ha a re upraopariyowei.

he stopped when he was very close (to him). aopariyowei.

encarámense (sobre la plataforma) uno al lado del otro. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to crouch lined up one next to the other, to line up one next to the other. rãyoã.

to recover after being seriously ill. horuprou.

produced shavings. akaweshimararei.

to become completely wrinkled, flabby or crumpled (locally). wãpreteprou.

have they killed one of my male relatives, have they made him disappear. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

to kill a man (lit. frahaka hãweteãi.

to shake a bamboo arrowhead laterally to remove it from the arrow shaft; to kill a man. hãwete.

to give birth. tararei.

in the waterfall called waretha, above that waterfall was where, being a child, I really woke up. waretha a pora re yaupe, ihi a pora feaka ha, the puﬁ moyawea totihirihe.

waterfall, rapids. waretha.

to start cooking on or over a container placed directly on the embers, to start cooking on a metal plate placed on the embers (usually a cassava flatbread). rãmiprai.

short. hokata.

to become bald. hesi tahapiai.

venomous snake, Bothrops sp. (Viperidae). waro.

wasp (unidentified animal/plant). karosha.

apresúrate a colgar tu chinchorro debajo del de tu esposo. haheãrohe ke iha a ta pepia ta haiiku.

your husband. haheãrohe.

I am going to the forest. Uu oshi pei.

to go. oshi.

to split, crack, break in two a spherical object by striking it from above. tihathoprai.

I am the Spider Spirit hanging upside down (on the web). hãhãrãmãethawe ya ihohoa kuyahi (cha.

In the center (of the web), where it is dense, the Spider Spirit was curled up. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

Spider Spirit. hãhãrãmãethawe.

to be very hungry. sokasokami.

1. to perforate, make a hole in a wall, open an orifice in a hollow trunk, open a package wrapping with fingers to take something out of it. 2. the state of a wall that has been perforated, a wrapping that has been opened with fingers.. horosho.

to make love (said by a man). wãewãemo.

I am carving a bamboo tip. r ahaka ya kopemai.

we will prepare bamboo tips like these (to go to war). e naha rafaka ke pe kuwe pema pe ha kopemani.

to prepare, smooth the shaft of a bow or carve bamboo tips. kopeprai.

el pueblo de los capuchinos trepó en gran número a un bejuco de cadena, el pueblo de los monos blancos hizo lo mismo. rasirasi thotho hami wishari pe pruka tuketayoma, hoashiri pe sho pe pruka isia pariketayoma.

trepó, escaló. tuketayoma.

tell someone to work in the fields. hikari-momai.

to recover an object from that maneparuheni (cha. haprapi peni ware mori taprai kurãrekei, perf. ): the hekura were about to transmigrate in order to give it to someone. : recuperar un objeto de esa maneparuheni (cha.

the hekura (spirits of the dead) were about to transmigrate. maneparuheni.

(he) provoked the wind to make a humming sound. pei maki no yaripi ma rororomou.

irritate, bother, annoy; provoke wind. yaripi.

Lanceolate bamboo point. yuri ya pe ha sherarini, mrakatahu a ha Punta lanceolada de bambú. Used for fishing and hunting large animals. Sirve para la guepruka pe praoma.

lanceolate bamboo point. guepruka.

to become locally wrinkled, shriveled or soft (perfective aspect of the inchoative). wãpreterariyo.

to make love loudly (said by a man). horomo.

regresa pronto entre nosotros a llorar la muerte de nuestro padre (lit. haye e puhi kãi ohote ta koã haia.

lament, mourning. haia.

the back part of the cultivated field, the oldest part. hikari theka posi ka.

back part of the cultivated field. hikari theka posi ka.

when the belly of the woman exploded, the pieces flew away. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to explode, burst. homoprou.

to be partially torn or shredded. rehihia.

I have slippery hands and everything slips out of them all the time (= my hands are so slippery that I can't hold onto it). ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

he lowered the turtle (sliding it down along its support) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to become weak and fall. yohoprou.

sit here. a ta roikiyo.

he went quickly to hide behind the trees and immediately called the human beings. pei ke yo ha yetu ke the pata ha wariripraikiyoni, yãnomãmi the nakai shoaoma.

to go towards (a location). -ikuyo.

in the place where the body of my deceased female relative is laid out, an unknown and terrifying voice was heard. ipa wãware na ware na: ﬂor gamopétala del árbol ware nahi, es remashi a re rukepiyei ha, yai the kipi ã no re kimuy perfumada y a las mujeres les gusta llevarripiyei e.

the place where the body of a deceased female relative is laid out. rukepiyei.

los dos niños regresaron a la casa para buscar tizones. ihiru ke kipi koã kopeheriiwei, koa wake niya ha tepiani.

amarró hojas sobre un palo, añadió un tizón, y se puso a trepar de nuevo. horotowe ke the hi ha yãã ke henaki ha okãpani, iha kai wake kãi yetea ha shoamakini, the torerea re kopeheriiwei.

tizones (pieces of burning wood). kopeheriiwei.

to divide into two parts by tearing or separating a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hahathoprai.

to always be criticizing or scolding. wã pakehe.

why do they always speak ill of me. weti ke the ha yare wãhã shiro wayoamai.

to criticize someone, to speak ill of someone. wayoamai.

to approach, to get close. pesheku.

plural object, dispersed. ãsiprawe.

to speak badly. yãnãri.

he cleared the way by pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand; to reject someone with the hand; to clear the way with the hand. hãiprai.

we are now approaching the last part of the journey. p emaki peishokuai waikia ke a kure.

approach, get closer to the end. poushoku.

and that is the reason why I was invited. e naha a kuu puhio yaro kahiki hoã rea mi paa kupiyeni.

to be invited. kupiyeni.

(he/she) speaks from upstream. poa namoﬁ.

upstream. namoﬁ.

to take a split tobacco leaf for oneself following the central vein. pee nahe repokosirei.

to take a leaf split in that way for oneself. repokosirei.

do not believe that the Yanomami will stop blowing on each other. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

to blow on each other. onoope.

no hacía mucho tiempo que ellos habían sido incinerados. the pe puhi no preo tutoo yaionowei ha.

cuando uno acaba de ser inicia-. wa epenapi koo tutoo tehe, yaro re a ma roo tehe, wa the mitai hayua re perayoheriiwei.

that has just been done or made. yaionowei.

put your two hands there (to receive it), it is a male (that is being born). pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke a hoã.

to peel yopo grains, to scratch oneself, to put one. iprushia.

to soil or stain something, with plural objects. shamimararei.

he was lost, when he saw Cachicamo on the path. a ha mohoruruni, moro ke a tarareherima.

he/she/it saw him/her/it. tarareherima.

to march slowly (perfective). kaweherei.

he placed the pieces of meat on the smoking rack. ihirãki a ha yaro a makeprai.

to place several objects on something, to place on a tray. makeprai.

¿qué será lo que hay dentro de esa cesta. hei weti ke the pe rii thari.

poner algo en una cesta. thari thai.

basket. thari.

to exhale, to feel. patheai.

they do not fear (lit. fnosi ahihi.

to pursue, to follow. fnosi.

dejar secar, prender fuego y esparcir las brasas. shirikimarini, wake yerini, wa ha yãrãreãrini.

to spread embers. yãrãreãrini.

to despedazar, lacerar, reducir a trocitos, aplastar bajo un peso, dejar que un alimento se deshaga por exceso de cocción (to shred, lacerate, reduce to pieces, crush under weight, let food fall apart from overcooking). nahihimararei.

our distant ancestors disliked the chatter of honey bees. no patapi peni puu u pe ã nohi wãripoma.

ancestors, first humans. no patapi.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood upright, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

to be standing close together, to be upright against each other (rocks). shirikiwe.

in all the places where (the capuchin monkeys) had smeared their bloody penises, the tree trunks were crossed by bloody lines. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami, hiki tiprutuwe.

to be completely decorated or striped with transverse lines. tiprutuwe.

the two women sat slowly on the edge of the hammock, then one of them lay down against it. ke kipi re tipeariyouwei, yetu ai ke a re yakakeiwei.

to lie down, to recline. hohãthã.

to flash repeatedly (lightning). ihãihãmo.

there where the ãpuri tree rises, there where a koshiro bee nest is found, I will go to collect honey (lit. ei ãpuri hi re uprayahi, ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni, ya naki ta ruwemoma.

to destroy a beehive to harvest honey (lit.: to deprive of warmth). ruwemoma.

to be completely skinned, to be completely peeled. tiproka no.

to beautify, to make beautiful (perfective, declinational, inclusive). riyeherayou.

to scratch a specific place. tikokokei.

to have the face painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakirakei.

to stay for a moment in the center. thariprou.

banana plant shoot. kuratha si kararu.

shoot. kararu.

we will arrive now at the place called Kãmohãwe (downstream). kãmohãwe ha hei tehe pemaki kuaai shoaparekirio.

a place name (possibly a river name). Kãmohãwe.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the screaming piha (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

screaming piha (bird species). watawarawe.

will he start to smile finally. pe kasi watea ke a ta kuhani.

to smile. watea.

Amakurithawe just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe (cha.

to set fire to magical substances. piyemaparihe.

he is becoming your friend. wa nohi toai.

to start to appreciate, to become fond of. toarei.

old palm tree of pijiguao whose wood is very hard. famahi si.

old palm tree whose wood is very hard. famahi.

to say which community one belongs to, to indicate one's kinship. wãhã hirou.

to indicate one. wãhã hira.

bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

slightly curved, having a slightly curved shape. parokoprou.

the door gets stuck. yoka hão.

a fish bone will get stuck in your throat. wa niosi hããrei.

to get stuck, to get caught, to get intercepted during a fall. hããr.

to be always criticizing or scolding. wã pakehe.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or a magic substance). heheteai.

a plant with thick fleshy leaves, sagittate-ovate in shape, that grows on the water. Montrichardia.

The bees are swarming. tori ke pe.

to swarm. rãtãrãtãmou.

they had stood side by side, and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to stand side by side, to be standing one next to the other. thãriritariyo.

to worry about someone. puhi mi yapaai.

the father of Tucán came to take Kasima as a wife. mayepirithaweni pe hiini kasimi a tea mi parema.

to take a woman (for seduction or marriage). mayepirithaweni.

the dog curled up on itself. hiima a motorekema.

to coil up, curl up, form a ring or loop. motorekei.

to cut a stick so that its end is completely flat and smooth, as done by large beetles of the simitori species when they gnaw on tree branches. simiti.

I am squatting. mi kuyuhua.

to be in a squatting position. kuyuhu.

to do it for oneself. rekerei.

I went to see. ya miãkema.

they came to see (watch over) this path. hei re yo wãri miãkeyorumahe.

to go to see. miãkema.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami passed (carried by the current) one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma.

they passed (carried by the current). hayupraoma.

to kill a male person. frahaka hãwete.

(one day) you will hear it said that we have killed some of our enemies (lit. "rafaka re pe hãwetekema fa tharei", wamaki yimika kuu totihiope.

to shake lightly and laterally a bamboo tip to remove it from the arrow shaft in which it is inserted. hãwetãr.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed when falling to the ground (a single object). tikuihuai.

to have been completely torn or cut into several strips. sherira.

they already secured blood revenge. the pe matohipi koo waikirariyo kuhe.

they already secured blood revenge. waikirariyo.

to hit someone in the chest in a downward motion. tuyeparei.

I approached the enemy warriors slowly (and without realizing it). wayu pe rii ha ya aheteariyo.

to approach slowly (and without realizing it). aheteariyo.

he speaks to him shouting (from the south of the Orinoco). yare nowã rayemai mahei.

to address someone shouting, to speak to someone dominated by anger. rahumai.

the (bunches of) yahe fruits are low (on the palm trunk). yahatotowe ha the ki yetekea kure.

to hang near the ground, to tie low. yahatotamai.

my son, here comes the buzzing that precedes (and announces) the arrival of the puriwa. a reãã wã re pariimi ye.

vivid red decorative element that enters into the attire of the hekura. reúpuriwa.

to become stiff or rigid due to effort. hiraraprou.

when one has just been initiated into the men's cult. wa the mitai hayua re perayoheriiwei.

when one has just been initiated. perayoheriiwei.

in the places where the caterpillars are grouped together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) on the embers. kasha ke a werereope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

I arrived at a place where the kasha caterpillars were grouped together (in parallel formation, one with another). kasha ke a werereope hami ya warokema.

to be arranged in parallel, to be grouped together in a parallel formation. werereope.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to start feeling sleepy. maharishiai.

he took the woman by the arm and had sex with her silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to have sex (when spoken by a man). wamou.

Translation:. payoarima kohi.

they will call me. yare ta yeﬁreferiyo.

they will call me. yeﬁreferiyo.

the hallucinogenic ayukuma gives hunger or the will to work. ayukuma peni the pe ohetrabajar, estar ocupado.

to work, to be occupied. hikã.

deposit (durative). papehou.

(noise) occurred nearby. wã tisukei.

to occur nearby (noise). tisukei.

it is necessary that you divide in two the deer's thigh. haya wa waku ha hakaroprarini.

to divide in two a fruit by cutting it in the indicated way, to split in two a round object by applying traction with the hands on the opposite edges. hakaroprai.

I just expelled the evil that was inside you (shaman speech). ya the wayu hoyarei kuroi (cha.

to expel the pathogenic principle from the body of a sick person. wayu hoyai.

to be always eating, to consume the ashes of a deceased person (plural subject). iyaoprou.

the cave of Yotenama had a strange smell of wild beast. yotenama ke theka ni pata yaithapi ni huthethewe yaiwe.

to have a strange smell of wild beast. yaithapi.

to feel sick. heparoho.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

to pronounce the invitation speech during a feast, or to respond to it. teshomomou.

to eat like a glutton. wausimou.

to get a little better for a while and then get worse again. wahutou.

if no preparan un ovillo de algodón no obtendrán una olla grande. ana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

if. ana.

to fall asleep when night ends. fmio henao.

when I sleep deeply I lose all consciousness. ya mio he thareo tehe ya mohotua ma totihire re.

to sleep, to fall asleep. fmio.

we went together to gather the firewood we needed (to cook) at the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

to do it (a collective work) in a precise place or on a precise surface (perfective aspect of the durative). pathothorarei.

to become numerous (perfective). yahararayou.

you will weave an open-weave basket or mapire and we will paint ourselves (imprinting the hexagonal pattern of the mapire on our skin). yoroﬁ ke wa tiyepe, pefeki onimope.

to weave an open-weave basket or mapire. tiyepe.

block, obstruct. ka komã.

to take something out of someone. yahatotoprawe.

to begin to mix. koyokoprai.

high. alta.

the two women went directly taking another path. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to go directly towards (an enemy, prey, etc.). tiheriproma.

to be rough, rugged, granular, stony. erereã.

I am the one who will sew the garment. kamiyeni iro ya siki he hãrei.

to have sewn, to have mended. hãrei.

I was going quickly to reach them. rope ya pe nosi hurirema.

to reach someone quickly. hurirei.

onoto tree; Bixa orellana (Bixaceae). nana shihi.

this has the same smell as onoto seeds. hawe nana shi monoku ni kuwe.

onoto (a reddish-brown dye made from the seeds of the achiote tree). nãrã.

the shelters form a circle. yãno pe tihiyeai.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they lived then downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma (mit.

to describe a circle, to form a circle. tihiyeai.

to make someone commit an act as a result of which they later feel attracted to a situation. wakeentre.

to cry out in pain for the dead (and would demand that they be avenged). asi.

to masturbate. korikorimou.

he was the one who exterminated the váquiros. ware, ihini the ki mi re watheanowei.

Hoo had eaten his brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

exterminate, consume totally. wathei.

to remain lying in a hammock with someone or something for a long time. yakatao.

to make smooth and wet (perfective). frakaharei.

I am the song of the Yoreshiãmi Spirit passing before you. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope e.

bird; Monasa sp. (Bucconidae). yoreshiãmi.

to make something crumble or collapse completely. hishishiprou.

he returns (to live) with us. a peaai koãyorua.

he returns (to live) with us. koãyorua.

magnificent, Dormilo tilted in a threatening manner. wathaperariwe re a noshi harirawe krei kupariyoma.

to split, break, soften, collapse, tilt, sway. krãã-.

to extend something between two objects, to unite two objects. katiamai.

edible fruits of this tree. arowaye ãsi.

tree; Zizyphus cinnamomum (Rhamnaceae). arowaye.

daughter of mine, bring me my tube so that I can inhale the hallucinogen soon. nakami, purinama usi ta poima, epena ya ta koai haio.

daughter, younger sister, younger female cousin, or any young girl to whom one wants to show affection. nakami.

to have one eye closed. mamo ãsio.

to close one eye. ãsio.

to start loosening something. proroprai.

the burning breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

to spread out suddenly, to make oneself heard unexpectedly. pakayuprao.

to nibble something. wãfã wãewãemou.

to nibble. wãewãemou.

the destructive power of my axe. ayawa koshi wakeni.

destructive power. wakeni.

the way the male paují bird calls. kookoomi.

Prueheyoma (them) cursed immediately. prueheyoma a hirai shoaoma.

to curse, to scold, to rebuke. hirarayou.

he is becoming your friend. wa nohi toai.

to start to appreciate, to become fond of. toarei.

to approach a noise or voice. titetemakei.

give fish to my younger brother, whom we ask to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

when they sit next to each other they have to make you sit in the center. the pe roo yehihimou tehe, mi ãmo ha ke wa kãi romapouhe.

to keep something or someone in a certain position. fyaumapou.

tree. canachi.

to crush or flatten multiple objects by striking with a stick (perfective aspect). yatikiakei.

he makes the noise stronger. a wã nakeamai.

to make something stronger, amplify a noise; to season with pepper a food, make tobacco spicy (by preparing it well). nakeamai.

each time the husband went hunting, Siroromi would arrive in his absence. yamare wãri yimiraimi yaiwe tharomi a kotããi yaimou heama (mit.

to arrive in someone. sirodría.

headdress of the hekura with the shape of a butterfly. watoshe hurahura.

as soon as the turtle bit sharply into its throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

1. To drink, suck (breast). 2. To bite sharply (animal, snake); to cut, break off with a sharp bite; to make regular marks with the teeth. waweheai.

to spread rumors, divulge lies. wã yapiki.

to fall and disseminate; to spread rumors or lies. yapiki.

1. to peel the seeds of the yopo plant, 2. peeled yopo seeds. iprushi.

dark and arched eyebrows. pei weyomahiki ushipi wathoa.

eyebrow. weyomahiki.

a. una.

cremation. rante.

fruit of the pahi hi tree. The white and sweet aril is eaten.. pahi.

no cesar de caer enfermo, enfermarse muchas veces seguidas. he hariri tikeai.

to keep getting sick, to get sick repeatedly. tikea.

plant or animal taxonomy. turumi.

noises of insects and birds associated with the presence of a conuco. hikari theka heã.

the noises that announced the conuco of Aparecido were heard immediately. pore re hikaripi theka heã kuo shoaoma (mit.

noise, signal (real or imaginary) associated with a place or creature; signal that announces the imminent appearance of the being to which it is associated. heã.

go downstream to look for cambur palm fruits (bringing the bunch in the hand). tapitapirimi ke ki ta yepikirio.

to lift, to pick up and carry an object. yepirei.

to stand at the entrance, to keep one. hewehe.

duration, moving away. poti.

it was an ugly capuchin monkey's tail, with few hairs. wãritiwe ke the teshina wararawe e kuoma.

to become less dense, to clear up (vegetation); to stop being crammed, stuffed. warara.

to fail repeatedly in curing a sick person. imiki huhehou.

the hekura spirits have abandoned me, I have become a powerless shaman. ware tiraatarai waikiomahe, tira no ke ya.

to fail, to be unable to do something, to give up, to abandon. huhe.

ant. shiãporokomi.

to make noise by dragging. tãrãrãmo.

to be shallow. ka maketiwe.

to be reimbursed, to be restituted; to get something in return, a compensation; to get paid. reem-.

the ancestors transformed into laziness. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

to transform into laziness (mythological). ihamaprou.

to approach a noise or voice. titeteamai.

to pluck feathers from a bird; to singe the hair of an animal before gutting it. hukukurarei.

(the animal) was digging a hole by removing the earth with its paws. pei mamikini the ki kakekuka(ke) iha.

to dig a hole by removing the earth with the paws/feet (of an animal). kakekukakekumai.

to have an infected eye. mamo ripupiai.

to infect. ripu.

night monkey, dormouse. trivirgatus.

to have become deformed. koheherayou.

the jaguar died there, only its bones remain. kihami ira ke a nomarayou no kureshi, pei ke u pe shiro hiraa kurarei.

to die, to disappear suddenly. marayou.

to trace the lines described earlier on someone. hukekeai.

wild rabbit; Silvilagus brasiliensis (Leporidae). fãfã.

to shake vigorously an object held with the fingertips to remove something from it (especially to remove excess ash from tobacco leaves when preparing a wad). yimisirarei.

to be angry. shoporopi.

valency. valencia.

one of them suddenly saw him and then all fixed their gaze on him. ai the mamo re keprakeiwei, the pe mamo pruka re shatiprakeiwei.

to suddenly see, discover, catch sight of. keprakeiwei.

he sharpened the end of his club a lot. himo ora ke a namo thai preyukua.

to sharpen, to make the point of an object very sharp. preyukai.

"now that things are barely perceptible (in the dark), we will get lost", we say. pei inaha the wai waroshoo tehe pemaki yakeriheri, yamaki ha kuni.

to be barely perceptible in the dark. waroshoo.

(it was known later that) he had visited all the rock formations of the region. wa mape no heteprai shoarayou ta no kureshini (mit.

to know, to be aware of. supo.

me di cuenta de que le habías regalado vestimentas a la gente de Tokonawe. tokonawe theri pe rii ha wahe siki ma re hipeakenowe thai.

place name. tokonawe.

to have suspended cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry. rukekekei.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

food. moku.

suegro, agarré un caribe y salé (el agua para cocinarlo). shoape, poo ke ya koshi yokerema, ya koshi sayuprarema.

piranha, caribe fish. yokerema.

I'm going to eat my peeled bananas cooked in water. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta wa ke.

Cook peeled bananas in water for me. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta tupa.

small variety of banana. kurathaye.

to be thin. hitihiti.

to crumple or dent it in several places. wãikipram ai.

to crumple or dent something in several places. wãikipram.

I was afraid and startled. the auprariyoma.

I was afraid and startled. auprariyoma.

to be agitated in different places. lu-hirehire.

to drop, throw, let fall from above, intentionally let something fall while being up in a tree [kemakei, perf. kemai: tirar, lanzar, dejar caer desde lo alto, dejar caer algo voluntariamente estando arriba de un árbol [kemakei, perf. : to make fall, throw in a different place]. : hacer caer, tirar en un lu.

in different places. lu-.

bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

slightly curved, having a slightly curved shape. parokoprou.

to be hospitable, welcoming (habitually), to say the right thing to make people feel good. hatukewe.

to make a funeral pyre. koa wake ka tha.

funeral pyre, bonfire on which the dead are cremated. koa wake ka.

to improve, to fix, to repair; to order, to classify. tomai.

I will also scratch you repeatedly. pe si hukekea mi hetur a r e i.

to scratch repeatedly (perfective of the inchoative). hukekerei.

what's happening. eshi ke te.

what?. te?.

paper. papeo.

to take several parts. hakarorarei.

to lure into a trap, invite people to a party in order to kill them and/or take their women. nomohori.

to leave something to become deformed or hardened like leather, by tying it with a long rope. prihãkei.

we have walked on the plain. he yari hami yamaki huma.

plain, flatland. nura.

to advance one behind the other. hirihi.

to remove the damaged or bruised part of a fruit by making a circular incision with a sharp object. yakore.

to fill with dust, to let something get covered in dust (through negligence). piãmai.

I am afraid. patamarima henaki.

to be afraid. patamarima.

that which is not edible (and is thrown away); object that is in such a state that it must be discarded. hoyamou.

I have felt well for a brief moment. totihoruhe.

your teeth are so big (that I'm afraid). wa naki pata kuyehewemi (mit.

said of an object that is in such a state that it induces one to give up on it. kuyehewemi.

the myth goes: he stretched it downwards, perfect tense. yãteyãtemotima (mit.

to stretch downwards. yatukamai.

iliac bone. pehiki.

They lifted the logs and searched for a long time. koã ke ãsho pe hãshãeãprama, the pe hãshãemai yaioma.

to lift and displace objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) in order to search for something underneath them. hãshãeãprama.

to enter into a dense vegetation and become completely hidden inside it. hithetheai.

the ghosts got scared and suddenly disappeared. porepore ke pe ha kiriraruni pei ke the pe mratou ha peroherini.

to disappear suddenly, to vanish. peroherini.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long extended line. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

to stretch out in a line, to extend. tutu.

to tear a strip for oneself. makokorei.

tree that has slid on its stump without falling. fhi tihea.

1. tree that slides on its stump without falling after being cut (usually gets caught on other trees); 2. to graze, touch lightly. itihe.

to let pass beyond, to let go beyond. torehemakei.

to become smooth, to become smooth and moist. frakahaai.

while we were eating, day completely dawned. yamaki iyatii tehe yama the mi harua re hititimareiwei.

while eating. iyatii.

to strike with the foot during a fight (a bird). kakekai.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to brandish, to hold over or above the head, to threaten someone by brandishing a machete, stick, etc.. yarehepou.

the wood is already hollowed out (by insects). hi si hororoprou waikirayoma.

to be hollowed out, to be full of holes (perfective of the inchoative verb . horororayou.

here there are not many, hanging tightly together (hanging pots). hei ke e pe pata ma re hãrokowe.

to hang tightly together. fãroko.

the tábanos have the sucking beak flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to have become, to have been, or to be flat at one point and nowhere else. tatahaa.

receive a small quantity of something. wãisipipei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). makukushimi.

to have disheveled hair. he hurukuo.

to have been disheveled (state). he huruka no.

1. to have disheveled or tangled hair, 2. to tousle or dishevel someone. huruku.

pintar, teñir localmente. frãihimakei.

he/she/it is always running. a rereokei.

he/she/it is always doing (an intransitive action). rereokei.

to give an object in exchange for another. nomihikei.

to feel headaches after having walked a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : the path has shaken previously). ).

1. to vibrate, experience small shakes; to sway 2. to tap with the hand, prepare a hallucinogen by tapping a leaf on which the powder rests, in order to separate the coarse particles from the fine ones. tiriki.

The doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to be riddled with holes or punctures. tereshãm.

a foot (due to a blow or wound). mamiki*.

he went down again (along the trunk). the ithoa theri ha kothoherini.

to go down, descend in a straight line, march in a line, go to the foot of a tree, etc.. tothe.

they kill the wasps (crushing them with their hands). imikini kopina pe re shep r a r i r a h e i.

the fingers; the hand. imikini.

(in) arari: el pue-. pue.

generic term applied to macaws. pue-.

Translation:. koãnaye ninihi.

frog. koãna.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

1. To make someone absorb a malefic substance (h e r i) by mixing it with food; to feed a hekura by offering ami u. 2. To take medication orally (neol.). koa.

he is always wandering around the house (insulting). fa huu wãritiwe keekeeapraroti.

to wander around lifting and lowering the tail (as certain birds do). keekeeapraroti.

don't touch, don't steal (lit. fmi [+ neg. : don't look). ]: no tocar, no robar (lit.

you deserve it (lit. fei the ta mi.

to look, to observe. fmii.

To wear out from use. waruhu.

to give shelter to someone; to keep an object close to oneself in one. huwepou.

they will find refuge on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha the pe he ruoyorupe.

we had just gathered to live together when we went to war with the inhabitants of Maiyo. pemaki hapa komi hirao tehe maiyo theri pe sho pemaki niyayoma.

Mount Maiyo was rising again, very visibly. maiyo ke ki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini.

a mountain or hill. maiyo.

to put to soften seje in hot water. si poshomai.

to soften (something) in hot water. poshopei.

fish, pike characin. hiiporewe.

sostente bien o te vas a caer. wa ha rohothoikuni wa wãri keru.

to fall. keru.

durative. durativo.

to kick multiple objects or perform multiple kicking actions. kahathomai.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to compress, to support on; to place one object on another to keep it in place. pateteai.

to start feeling or be feeling a violent stomach pain after a shock or after receiving a blow. yoothoo.

they observe the morichal. siki miihe.

they observe the morichal. miihe.

to detach, to separate from a main body. hoyoprou.

to repair an arrowhead made of bamboo (if it was damaged by an impact). thetar.

the pijiguao palm aged, and its wood became hard. rasha si amahiãi.

to age and harden (wood of palm). amahiãi.

I have the habit of wrapping a thick vine (around my ankles) because they generally wear out quickly (when climbing or descending a palm tree). prowehewe ke ya thotho pe motorewe thapou tharei, the pe kãi waruhou si ihehewe.

to crumble, to pulverize (earth). waruhai.

Translation:. raharaha henaki.

how?. ¿cómo?.

in the hole of his earlobe he had inserted parrot tail feathers. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the shinaki huurema.

hekura (spirit) associated with the parrot (Amazona ochrocephala). It repeats everything it hears. kurikayariwe.

poisoned. envenenado.

Horonãmi who was lost found Cachicamo. horonãmi a mohoru ha kuparuni, moro a tararema (mit.

to get lost, to stray. mohoru.

to masturbate (someone). pikukuai.

the ghosts got scared and suddenly disappeared. porepore ke pe ha kiriraruni pei ke the pe mratou ha peroherini.

to disappear suddenly, to vanish. peroherini.

the people of Hukowe invited us. hukowe theri peni pemareki nakai kuprehei.

we want to regroup and we call each other. yamaki niya ha kokãmoni pei ke yamaki nakayou kupiyei.

to invite, to summon, to call. kuprehei.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuãprou.

to begin to paint round spots on one. tipikipramou.

I have an irritated eye due to a foreign body. ya mamo ripuripupi.

1. Foreign body (dust, plant particle, etc.) that enters the eye. 2. Dust of bones of a dead person.. ripuripu.

the shamans do not cure any sick person, none of them attacks the disease (saying krashi. the pe nohi reai mai, "krashi. while striking it). ", pe kuu mai.

None of them attacks the disease (saying krashi! while striking it). krashi!.

(synonym verb). yashishi-.

to heat food. yotaprai.

float immediately, without sinking first. potaai.

the woman kept sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. suwe ke a mi hore wãheãpraroma, yii ke ki ha a he yohoapraroma.

she kept sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. wãheãpraroma.

I must be sleepy, I'm yawning all the time. ya nami maharishi ya kahiki shiro rereo.

to have one. rereo.

it was not long before the turtle's head suddenly drooped (from illness). poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to be seriously ill. reipraa.

the vines (that serve to tie) loosen due to the heat of the sun. hotho pe terekou.

loosen. terekou.

supernatural being. puriwatoriwe.

to mix more than two powders in that way. tikururarei.

while coming down to meet us, the fire in the chest of the demon Omãyãri ignited. omãyãrithawe ke pariki wake homoprou mi ha paoni, kama re pe ithoprou re tehe (cha.

a demon. Omãyãri.

go downriver to look for cambur palm fruits, carrying the bunch in the hand. tapitapirimi ke ki ta yepikirio.

to have, to carry in the hand (with the arm hanging down). yepipou.

these palms of pijiguao are not mine, they belong to another (or: these palms of pijiguao are not what we are looking for). hei rasha ke the siki re uprare, shomi ke siki.

no, he said, you are other people. ma, e kuma, shomi wamaki.

other, different. shomi.

to hang low; to hang, tie with a fairly long rope, tie a canoe at the end of a fairly long rope (so that the boat can follow the rise or fall of the water during the night), tie a load to be carried on the back with a fairly long strap so that it can hang at a good height (neither too high nor too low). preyuai.

1. To put to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. 2. To tell someone to dry, to start smoking.. tetekamai.

to smear, stain, dirty with clay or earth. kroapiamai.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to cause to submerge. paotamai.

the two were confused. pe pruka roa ma kupe fãifãiyomiriwe.

they were confused. fãifãiyomiriwe.

(he/she/it) dreams. t thapimou.

dream. thapimou.

to bend, to twist (inchoative). koheãi.

1. To bend, to twist. kohe.

to pile up (fruits). pororou.

to climb quickly. torereai.

here there are not many, hung together (hanging pots). hei ke e pe pata ma re hãrokowe.

objects hung tightly together. hãrokoprawe.

within a moment the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky), he said. waiha, iha mothoka yahatotoprope, a re kuuwei.

the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky). yahatotoprope.

trees dragged in successive form by the fall of another larger one, especially when their trunks have been previously carved to obtain this result. nomihou.

to be afraid. kaisarami.

with the help of my hekura I will keep the anaconda at a distance. wãikoyã ya ki wãri hãmapouwe (mit.

to hold someone, prevent someone from falling by holding them; extend arms to prevent someone from advancing; use shamanic powers to keep a malefic being at a distance. ãmapou.

to finish staining or spotting. hayapishiprou.

to form a block. hikini.

this smells like cassava flour. a ni mihitapisini.

to have the smell of cassava flour. mihitapisini.

the girl that they raptured when they attacked us, they certainly carry her (on their back). suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

they raptured. shurukuuhe.

cooked; dry (wood). ripi.

cooked; dry (wood). ripi.

to be submerged completely. shototowe.

he grabbed the fire, but did not rise (= but did not manage to rise). wake teai ma kui a isipronomi (mit.

not to rise, not to grow, not to sprout (a plant). isipronomi.

the cavity of the tree quickly became narrower. hi ka wãkikou ha kuikuni.

to become narrower (hollow, cavity). wãkikou.

I was biting my tongue. ya aka wetioma.

to bite one. wetio.

Siroromi appeared when the great fire was burning. wake pata wauwaumou tehe, siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

to arrive, to come. wauwaumou.

the old man was dragged dead along the floor of the house. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

to drag a long object along the ground. hiririrei.

to speak. taparu.

to start shaving one. mãrokoshipramou.

to receive a basket of food. ni ithãpei.

to receive a basket of food. ithãpei.

there is honey everywhere (it is found, there is a lot of honey). pruka pe puu taprawe.

to have been discovered, to be visible, to be found in several places. taprawe.

uku. yarupeto.

Kãrãnãri will make you fall. kãrãnãrini wa kemarei.

supernatural being of the yai the class; kicks those who climb trees and makes them fall. kãrãnãri.

light-colored. ohotu.

to have hiccups. shokomo.

despite my pain, I shot an arrow at the gallineta. ketarini hãshimo ya niyaprarema.

I shot it with an arrow despite my pain. ketarini.

ketipa mo: edible seed of the plantain. ketipa mo: semilla comestible del platanillo. They are toasted on the embers within their rigid shell. Se las tuesta sobre la brasa dentro de su rígida envoltura.

edible seed of the plantain. ketipa mo.

while they were holding Hokotoyoma, they scraped his skin. hokotoyoma a huwepipou tehe, a hoãpii re kukeiwei (mit.

to scrape skin. hoãpii.

shall I leave you the leftovers. ahe ya shee ta hepei.

leftovers. hepei?.

to address the community loudly to express complaints, give an opinion on a matter, incite to work, relate a dream, etc.. patamorãyou.

laziness keeps one in a numb state. fthe pe shi harihimapou.

to keep in a numb state. harihimapou.

they told me not to do it. yare wasirema.

I told them to be quiet: "stay calm" I said to them. ya the pe ã wasia katitia waikirei kuhe: "mamikai ke pe wai ta kuiku", ya kuma.

to prohibit, to tell someone not to do something. wasia.

I don't believe at all that you will stop wanting to eat meat, that's why I object (to that gift). wãrekoshiãmi pe ya puhi kuimiyo ha totihioni, ya wã rea kure.

to persist in refusal. wãrekoshiãmi.

the sorcerers felt cold. okã pe wahaturayoma.

to cause cold, to provoke cold. wahatumai.

fishhook. ãsuero.

to beautify, make beautiful (by feeding well). riyehemai.

the dog called Tokorinawe was truly very big. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

hard. hihuwe.

to take a piece, a part, to offer it. ayakosiakei.

I descended the slope where there were foul-smelling (dead, rotting) cows. ware pe ni ithãri re hiraowei hami ya mi re weteparekiriowei.

to descend, to go down an inclined plane. hiraowei.

that is approaching. the aheai.

to approach (beginning of a process). aheai.

to loosen, to make looser. hihoamai.

I have itching on my lip. ya kasiki shihitikema.

to have itching (experience itching in a precise location). shihitiai.

I know it. ya the tai.

to know, to recognize. taa.

a brief and dry fart like a click of the tongue. tahamou.

he did not take long to reach the path of the one who appeared, on which he emerged, and then walked across the plain. pore re a no mayo hami yeture e he hapraa ha heikuni, a heyaripekirioma (mit.

the path of the one who appeared. heyaripekirioma.

prop up the mortar quickly with short logs. kihi the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ãsho horotow e n i.

to prop up, to support. paihiai.

to squat to defecate (human, animal). thopoho.

there where a nest of koshiro bees is found, I will go to gather honey (lit. ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni.

a species of bees. koshiro.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

I do not work. ya ohotamou maa ke a kure.

negation. ma.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

dominate by size, be bigger than. morokoprawe.

small hairy caterpillar whose hairs cause itching. shiema.

dog that pursues the main herd of cattle. tihetipou.

he is angry. posi ka komami.

to be angry. komami.

to put the head. pasuo.

weak smoke produced when starting a fire. watawatamou.

they all surrounded him and beat him. komi e pe he hã hãyopraruni, a sheremahe.

when we had finished surrounding them, the enemy warriors did not respond. wayu pe ã hai mi hetuonomi, yãnomãmi re the pe he hãyoprou tehe.

they began to surround us. yamareki he hãyopraremahe.

to surround, to encircle. hãyoo.

asociado al mono capuchino. hayariwishariwe.

they were going upriver looking for crabs. oko ke pe hupai mi yãmou ha kuparuni.

we will fish going upriver until here. yuri pema pe kãã mi yãmoimap e.

to go upriver, to climb uphill. mi yãmo.

it is here where I'm going to bathe (speaking from upriver). feha re ya yãrimou pashio shoao.

here (in the place where the speaker is located). pashio.

to have slowly extinguished (a fire). wãnonorayou.

a little fluid. fhereshihi.

ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día (lit. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati (mit. : hasta hacerse de noche). ).

to make suffer repeatedly. kreteriãi.

to throw bones out. popei.

the mixture of water and honey is (too) thick. puu upe mi hute.

dark black. ishi mi hute.

the bananas are very (too) ripe. tate pe wake mi hute.

very ripe (fruit), just before it starts to rot. poshoropi.

(related to) to be juxtaposed. hahatho.

the wind makes the palms buzz. masiko ke ki shiririmou.

to buzz, to hum. maa*.

go get my capuchin monkey's tail immediately. wishaye ke teshina ta koãi shoaohoru.

capuchin monkey. wishaye.

to scratch oneself once with a. hãsiki.

language (of the south of the Orinoco river). mathakiwe.

the conucos were far away, downstream. rotao kuperei.

Rabipelado was already far away when he thought: "And if I flew. nãroriwe a payeketao waikiwe tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

to move away, to distance oneself. -prao.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with his molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

fruit of the toatoa mohi tree. toatoa.

to execute blood vengeance, to kill someone to avenge a death (lit. fshereka maka siki hãniprai.

to cut in two, to split in half, into two equal pieces. hãniprai.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

to scratch, to uncover the ground with the foot to . fãrãru.

they wanted each other and lay together in the same hammock (to make love) without anyone noticing. ke kipi nohimayoma, ke kipi yakao hãthooma.

they wanted each other and lay together in the same hammock (to make love) without anyone noticing. nohimayoma.

semen, urethra (woman). moupe.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

they would have really liked to tell him to do it. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

to insist on someone to do something, to authorize someone to do something. shimiki.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to heal, to get better, to improve (health condition). manaheãi.

I crushed the wasp between my fingers. kopina ya na hutikiprarema.

to crush, squash, mash (by sliding fingers against each other). ãhu.

it is not big enough (what is said to excuse oneself when offering someone a small portion of meat). the etehemi.

to produce a weak or moderate sound. fwã hai etehemi.

to be small, not to be very big. etehewemi.

to sharpen (something). namo ishori.

to sharpen, make sharp. ishori.

to shake off once (e.g. shake hand or forearm to remove something). yomikirei.

to have a moldy taste. cahotetiwe.

to lift a hammock. ãrãnãmou.

he took the pot away. kamani hapoka a tereherima.

to take, to carry away. tereherimah.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent under the weight of the tapir climbing on it. kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei.

to bend under weight (perfective aspect of the inchoative). hithotherayou.

you seem to be brave (lit. wa nami kiriimi.

to be brave, to be fearless. kiriimi.

to uncover, reveal, discover (that which is hidden or masked); to remove the bark from cotton, part the hair to look for lice; to turn the pages of a book (neol.). apreshe.

tree. anahi.

to cram, pack tightly. yayonomou.

he pricked the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

it's still somewhat far. the ihete prahawe.

1. to prick or pierce with the tip of a branch; to move on tiptoe; to cling to the treetop and stretch the neck to see; source, spring. 2. adverb: almost. 3. verb intransitive: to march at the head, to be part of the leading group. iheteni.

banana plant shoot. kuratha si kararu.

shoot. kararu.

then I show them to him. pei ya the he tharea ha pemaparini.

to show (something) to someone under the effects of a hallucinogen. pemaparini.

I intend to domesticate the little birds, and I am waiting for their eggs to hatch. kirithami ya pe hiima niya ha teani, ya natheki homomai.

to wait for seeds to germinate or eggs to hatch. homomai.

the sipara kohi tree was not very large. sipara kuwetawe kohi wai kuoma.

give me a little. kuwetawe a ta hiyo.

1. Not very large, thin. 2. A little, not much.. kuwätawe.

to wet, to make wet. hereamai.

(habla de río arriba. pruku maﬁ.

(habla del sur del Orinoco. prukumari.

(habla del sur del Orinoco. prukunama nasiki.

upriver. pruku.

eat honey. puu upe ta wari.

to eat. fsheri.

to probe a den that is underwater. hipikei.

to vomit. kamishi yoruu.

to vomit, to throw up. yoru.

you go away (return to your home). a ta kopoheri.

to go away, to leave, to depart. kopoheri.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakakei.

to be happy. hããhããmi.

it is here where the disease demon has been fastened (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye.

to tie firmly, to fasten tightly. hatete.

go to look for earthworms, we will eat fish before leaving, we will set off after eating them. kohoromi shiki ta yua, yuri peheki ta waheri, heha peheki ha warini peheki huu kooheripe.

to go, to leave, to depart. waheri.

to consume the ashes of a dead person mixed with ripe banana puree. fishipe koai.

ashes. fishipe.

I burned myself in a fire, and that's how I became big. kai ke wake ha ya ha yaponi ya pata prerayou kurei.

to burn, to get burned. yaponi.

gotas de sangre chorrearon por mucho tiempo del nido de abejas (de la especie o i). oi ke a pata iye presheshou ha kuparuni.

to flow out, to emanate. presheshai.

arrugó hojas entre las manos y desnudó el suelo con el pie. esroshitaakini.

to go down (a river) in a place. tererekei.

to sharpen. hirosho.

to have hunger (terminative). shoeteprou.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to crush multiple objects by kicking them (perfective, plural objects). katikirarei.

he is afraid to speak to you. kahe ke iha a kahiki kuyeoma.

to refrain from speaking, to abstain from saying what one wants to say (often out of shyness). kuyeprou.

the ancestors who received the celestial disc on their heads immediately became amahiri. hetu misini no patapi pe re sheparenowei, amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

ancestors who received the celestial disc on their heads and immediately became amahiri. misini.

flowers of certain plants/trees. kosiki.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go out first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, to warn, to advise, to notify. yimirai.

to have firm, upright breasts. fhãkãmiki shererewe.

she had the breasts of a growing young woman, she was truly a young woman. suwe ke pe patai kure naha e hãkãmiki, moko totihiwe.

breasts (of the same person). hãkãmiki.

they killed váquiros and gave the broth of the cooked (meat) to drink (= they killed váquiros and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

to produce a dry sound by moving the jaws (váquiro). unen.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to feel joy at someone else. pereshi.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with his molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

to crush partially with molars, to chew food in that way. washishi.

to become spicy (food). prakipiprou.

the otter had curled up in a place where the high part of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to curl up, to be curled up at the bottom of something. hikokei.

to become pot-bellied. makasii.

guamo tree; Inga sp. (Leg., Mimosaceae). paﬁ.

to split longitudinally. ekoko.

(related word). shiu.

a very dangerous wãrihotho demon will lodge in the body of a beautiful Yãnomãmi. yãnomãmi riyehewe ke the rii ha wãrihotho wãritiwe ke a niya shatio totihia kure.

to lodge, to be lodged, to be stuck. niyakema.

¿Vendrás mañana con nosotros. —henaha wa huu nareope.

no. nareope?.

Squirrel was moving by jumping from branch to branch. karioriwe ke a wãri yutuaprarou re kuaaiwei (mit.

to move by jumping from branch to branch (a bird, a monkey, etc.). yutuaprarou.

as you can see I am helpless and I wonder what to do. ya puhi ma re horihii, weti naha yaiwe ta thawe, ya puhi ma re kuu waikiwe.

to be helpless, to not know what to do, to be bewildered. horihii.

trail habitually used by an armadillo. ikãyepi.

in all the points of the trees against which he had frotted his bloody penis, transverse stripes were seen. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to paint or draw transverse lines, to stripe. tiprutu.

to cry for a moment. ikit.

to deskin, to skin (an animal). tiprokorei.

to clean or polish locally. shutukahekei.

to smell, to sniff, to sniff out a smell. fni ukukãi.

to smoke a cigarette (neologism). fsikariyo ukukuãi.

to smell, to sniff, to inhale. ukukuãi.

we called each other, we called to gather. yamaki pokomayoma, yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to shout to call or attract someone; to call the hekura (newly initiated shaman). pokomi.

to divide it into many pieces, to divide it entirely. ayakosimai.

he tapped his teeth rapidly (with his index finger). pei e naki hupehupemoma.

to do something repeatedly or rapidly. -moma-.

Rabipelado was crushed under the rock and the macaw people rolled over his shattered remains on the ground to paint themselves. nãroriwe pei ke makini a nahihoma, a nahihiwe yapikope hami arari pe tihirumoma.

crushed, shattered, crumbled, smashed under a weight. nahihoma.

there the Yanomami position themselves on both sides of the herd of white-lipped peccaries and shoot arrows at them. kihami ware ke ki ha yãnoãmi the ki hore shekiamou yakaroai mapei ha.

to be straddled, to be located on both sides, to be overflowed on both sides, to straddle, to sit astride, to pass from one side to the other of something. yakaroai.

botanical family name. iaceae.

to put above. yutehamai.

to be slightly tense. karerehe.

it was like enemy shamans had thrown something, I picked it up, it was a vine. hawe okã peni the sheyekemahe the ha kupraruni, ya the ha hokereni, thoo thotho kuoma.

it was like, it was as if. kupraruni.

to hurt (oneself). yutukuai.

to cut (in the indicated manner) in two. tihetiprai.

when I jumped over a puddle, I landed on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

to jump over a puddle or depression in the ground. yutupraikuni.

to do a somersault. mohe hotekeprou.

to do somersaults. hotekou.

he has stopped breathing (he is dead). a herekou mrata riyo ma.

to make someone breathe forcefully. herekamai.

to breathe, to make someone breathe forcefully. ereke.

Baba mantenía el fuego dentro de su boca (para esconderlo). iwariweni a wake hopoma.

Baba tenía costumbre de ir a cocer los paquetes de orugas a la selva. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

Baba (a mythological figure). iwariweni.

To cross paths (while walking in opposite directions). hetutou.

(he/she/it) experienced pleasure. shi totihou.

to experience pleasure. shi totihi.

to be getting deloused. kekamorãyou.

supernatural dog, domestic animal of the hekura. thãri.

we will return home tomorrow. fenaha pemaki koãkoã shoapei.

tomorrow. fenaha.

when the fire crackles, it would be said that it is the warapa resin that is burning. wake koraramou tehe hawe warapa kokoki kuwe.

1. To gurgle, to splash, 2. To have borborygmi, to produce intestinal noises. koraramou.

to be completely damaged. eotowe.

Baba was short, he was of low stature. heweriwe hokatawe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi, yahatotowe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi (mit.

to be short, to be of low stature (a human being). ahatoto.

they have just gone flying. pe pe yeayou ke a kuhe.

to go flying. yeayou.

everywhere people are currently in scarcity. hei tehe pe the pe oheo totihiomopotayou.

everywhere people are in scarcity/famine. totihiomopotayou.

to separate into two groups. pashihi.

yo siempre respondo a las demandas de los hombres valientes. yãnomãmi kurahewe the pe riha ya the pe ã huamai si ihehewe.

brave. kurahe.

community divided into two groups, whose members reside in two dwellings very close to each other. fperio poakao.

to make love (with a man, said by a woman). moroshi wa-i.

to be congested, to have a stuffy nose. hokoã.

I put them side by side. ya the erekekei.

to place two elongated objects side by side. erekeãi.

to become loose, to become untied. ohororoprou.

they will recover the ocumo by bringing it closer with long poles. hãimãrãmi a kãi rekai piyekomahe (mit.

variety of ocumo; Xanthosoma sagittifolium (Araceae). hãimãrãmi.

as the day never ended, they ended up getting tired. the mi haru mraimi ha yãkumi the pe motaai totihioma (mit.

to be always tired. motaoprou.

tuvo que pasar mucho tiempo antes de que el suelo recuperara la firmeza, entonces ellos descendieron nuevamente. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma.

to have recovered strength. hiyakarayou.

I also. kamiye sho.

Dormilona and Tigra cazadora also painted their bodies. wathaperariwe sho, wereshãã sho the kipi yãmou kupariyoma (mit.

Baba and his wife had the custom of going alone to the forest to cook their packages of caterpillars over the coals. iwariwe sho, pe suwepi sho, uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaatii re ayaowei (mit.

also, equally, with; in company of; it also has a coordinating function. wereshãã.

observe that rooster, make sure its crest is beautiful. ei kak ara ke a ta mi, ei ke e moiki riyehewe ta mi.

crest or tuft of certain birds. moiki.

the voice of the ancestor came out from the depths of the den (saying): "Come get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni.

at a distance. paru.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

buttocks, rear end, backside. kuamishi.

I call him father (= he is a classificatory father for me). kama ke iha ya hiimou.

to call (someone) father, to have a father-child relationship with (someone). lla-.

banana variety from the Waika region. kuratha waika.

Waika region. waika.

crushed, shattered, crumbled. nahihirayou.

to have pierced/perforated (once). tiroshokei.

to inhale drugs through the nose, holding them in the palm of the hand or with the fingers. fepena ukukuãi.

to smell, to sniff an odor. fni ukukãi.

to inhale through the nose or mouth, to sip, to smell, to sniff (once). ukukuãi.

separate. tishi.

to make war (lit.: to make each other suffer). ohotamorãyou.

kinship term, vocative, refers to the daughter of the sister (possible future wife of a son). shete.

to carry objects from a canoe or water to land. washiri.

(upriver dialect form of . nofi.

there was a landslide and everyone fell rolling. mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururayoma.

to fall rolling (rolling on itself). prururayou.

some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pata prariroma (mit.

to scatter one by one, to shed (fruits, flowers, etc.). prathethai.

small burujara bird, Dysithamnus mentalis (Thamnophilidae). otushirimi.

1. to grow (human), 2. to make an arrow slightly longer than usual, 3. to be slightly long (arrow). tireheai.

to dawn. ukekeai.

estoy apretando los dientes del picure para hacerlos saltar. thomi naki ya hayomai.

to detach, to make someone/something come loose. hayoai.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to have flattened the end (of an elongated object). tataharayou.

to have the habit of offering, of giving (to visitors). totohai.

we waited for him, he arrived at night. yamaki no tao heama, weyate e koproma.

to wait a long time, to listen attentively. tatao.

to think about something else. shomiprou.

to crease or wrinkle completely, to have multiple creases or wrinkles in various parts. wãhihiprou.

he swelled up (from the water he had drunk). mãuuni a thororoprariyoma.

he swelled up. thororoprariyoma.

tomorrow I will go hunting, I am tired of staying (here). henaha ya rãmi huatarotayope, ya kuo mohipraruhe.

I am tired of a situation, I have lost the desire to work, I am tired of a job. huatarotayope.

to break into small pieces (durative, plural object). nakashimai.

to start breaking into small pieces. nakashiprai.

to break into small pieces. ragmentar.

plural personal pronoun, dispersed. hãkohoprawe.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

they would have really liked to tell him to do it. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

to tell someone to do something, to authorize someone to take an object. shimikema.

null. wayupuhurami.

ennegrecer (voluntariamente) un objeto exponiéndolo al humo. shipimai.

hunter. waika ãshi.

Mujer-curare desmenuzó un trozo de su piel y lo dejó caer en la garganta del hijo de Jaguar. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema.

yo desgrano maíz. yono ya mope hushishai.

desmenuzó, pulverizó con los dedos, resquebrajó dentro de la mano. hushishironi.

They are going. yauaimi.

to begin to. uheheprai.

to walk on the heels. mamiki kayetimou.

to walk on the heels. kayetimou.

to crackle. shãiãmou.

to choose first. makokoprai.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

1. to bend, to bend under weight; 2. fissure, crack; 3. to be elevated above. yasho.

to have dried/smoked (perfective). shirikirayo.

When he heard Lizard, Hairless One was afraid. refariwe a wã hiriai tehe nãroriwe a kirirariyoma.

he/she/it had fear, was afraid. kirirariyoma.

he suddenly appeared in the dwelling. yahi hami a shirimoma.

dwelling. shirimorayou.

to appear for a moment on the water surface. poketou.

out of so much anger, they turned their backs on each other. ke kipi hushuo humapi reomopotayoma.

they turned their backs on each other. reomopotayoma.

there where the ãpuri tree rises, there where a koshiro bee nest is found, I will go to collect honey (lit. ei ãpuri hi re uprayahi, ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni, ya naki ta ruwemoma.

to destroy a beehive to harvest honey (lit.: to deprive of warmth). ruwemomai.

to brace oneself on one's feet (to make an effort). mamiki hitatao.

to become stiff, to contract (to make an effort). hitatatou.

él guardaba la sustancia maléﬁca debajo de su guayuco y se apresuró a preparar la pequeña ﬂecha de bambú (con la cual debía lanzar esta sustancia). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

hay poca miel, y los nidos están aprisionados en las horcaduras de los árboles. pei u pe wai hãkikiwe.

esa pequeña cosa que se lleva apretada entre el guayuco y la piel (un cuchillo), yo he traído este arco para canjearlo. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei (habla de río arriba.

to carry something tucked or wedged between something else. hãkiki.

to reflect, to question oneself, to wonder what one is going to do, to be undecided. haimorayou.

it is for fear of the itching that lice produce that they shave their heads. noma pe no shiki kiri ha thaheni pe he mãrokoshipramai.

to produce itching. mãrokoshipramai.

the váquiros forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

to force someone to accompany. yaumakeiwei.

to turn (something) halfway, to rotate 180 degrees (imperfective). mi ãhemiãi.

to turn halfway, to rotate 180 degrees (terminative). mi ãhemiprou.

to turn halfway, to rotate 180 degrees. ãhemi.

but, have you done it already. wa ki ma ta thakihawe.

have you done it already?. thakihawe.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to line up one next to the other (iterative). rãyotaai.

to walk carelessly, without looking around, often with the gaze turned towards the ground. teiprou.

The one who is over there. kihi a re kurahari.

to be situated at a distance in front or upriver. rahari.

flower. rioko.

(he) rolled his eyes with half-closed eyelids. mamoku hiyãhãrãyou.

to roll one. mamoku hiyãhã.

I will bite you several times. pe si wetirarei.

to bite repeatedly, to bite several times. wetirarei.

far, distant. payeke.

to become less rigid, to wrinkle due to the sun (a tobacco leaf). yakarokai.

tree. esceae.

round object that has lost a piece due to a strike. yareshea.

it was at this time that I began to make love (regularly). re tehe ya sirisirimou kutariyoma.

to make love (said by a man). niaasi*.

receive a wrapped object. hãropei.

(related word, no clear translation provided). mamisi preinama.

Move in a line (and silently), like the chachalas. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

1. To line up, align. 2. To tighten (by aligning well) the straw strands of a basket. shaniniãi.

water that trembles. rayuku.

spotted, mottled (it). kirishãpi.

spotted, mottled. kirishãpi.

my wounds disappear. ya warasipi mraai.

my wounds. warasipi.

to stand on tiptoe. hitesheo.

to tie the legs of a hunted animal to the body (to carry it). ikokomai.

companion, helper. pariki*.

and if, when evening falls, we crouch on the plain. weyate, he yari ha yamaki ha ta yereiku.

dusk fell, then night, and he stayed there (in the tree) until morning. the mi weyarayoma, the he titirayoma, iha re the tikeo he haruma (mit.

evening, dusk, nightfall. weyate.

that morning I went to hunt the toucan. mayepi ya pe niyai henão kuprei.

past recent (within the previous half day to the act), it is obligatorily used with an imperfective or a state (implies duration: the development of a process or an activity, the duration of a posture or a state). henão.

to scratch (once) with the nails; to push with the nails to remove something, to push with. tisikiai.

to get bruised (in general). wãokoãi.

as soon as the turtle bit sharply into its throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

1. To drink, suck (breast). 2. To bite sharply (animal, snake); to cut, break off with a sharp bite; to make regular marks with the teeth. waweheai.

to squeeze a milky fruit between the hands to soften it and suck its pulp. hihathoEn.

I went early in the morning to my father's fire to place bamboo tips on my arrows. haye e nahi hami rahakaye ya ki pamai mi ukua henakema.

to place, to put. pa-.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something in the vicinity of a dwelling. hewemapei.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent (under the weight of the tapir climbing on it). kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei (mit.

small bow for a child. hithothema.

he prepared a tobacco quid while it was dawning. the mi haruu tehe pee nahe tihirutaarema.

he prepared a tobacco quid. tihirutaarema.

to be under the effect of. noma.

to have big ears (insulting). hiyãhãwe.

while they were digging them up, they sang like toucans to make the sweet potatoes come out. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe, huko mo pe mayepimow a p u; tahiapi a ta hukepa, ya the ta wapa.

sweet potato drink. hukomo uku.

sweet potato. hukomo.

flower, fruit. weti pei ke wa the ki.

to practice an incision on. hikore.

in the Montede-la-mujer-que-tiene-sus-reglas the ancestors gathered honey (of the ami ushi species). suwe roope keki ha poreri peni ami ke ushi tuyema.

Hill/Mountain of the woman who has her period. Montede-la-mujer-que-tiene-sus-reglas.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to shoot many arrows at a target without hitting it. tishikiãkei.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihi.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the place where the child was located. ihiru pei koroku ha ha kema.

to be downstream; to be located downstream. koroo.

he will carry a machete and nothing else. sipara ke a pou yawereoheripe.

to do something alone or in an isolated manner, to carry a single object. yawerea.

it is pleasant to touch with the foot (= it is pleasant to the touch). the kapamamou totihitawe.

sensation produced by an object when touched with the foot. kapamamou.

I scrape the shaft of the bow with a knife. sipara sini hãto ya nahi hirikai.

to scratch or scrape with the nails, usually to remove red spots caused by biting insects. tisik.

snake. tuquí.

trepar a un. mamiki waporo.

climb. waporo.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pamento.

to scatter one by one (fruits, flowers, etc.). moririrariyou.

to cause several trees to fall in the same direction by felling a larger tree during clearing. pakakuamai.

for free, without compensation, or gratuitously. nomai.

to stay for a long time in a hammock hung below another one. pehithetao.

(speech from upriver). frami.

he returned directly to his house. a shariria korayoherima, kama pe yahipi hami.

he/she/it returned directly home; they left together. korayoherima.

after they threw her into the water, she transformed into a guabina fish. a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

she transformed into a guabina fish. kemapariheni.

she deposited the two demiurges (who had just been born) in a spathe of the kanaposi palm and covered them with a dense layer of leaves (to hide them). kanaposi ha omawe ke kipi ha pakini, ke kipi he yohoa sutaa ha shoakini.

a dense layer or covering (of leaves). shoakini.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokerayou.

The váquiro bird took a shortcut going directly through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to take a shortcut through the forest. tiherirayou.

to shell corn (perfective, plural object). hushirarei.

it is in that rock that he penetrated. hei ke ki ha a rukerayou kurei (mit.

he introduced his penis and made love. rani.

a term related to the words . himomo.

while the parrot was perched, while it was at the end of its stick. werehi a ma roo tehe, a ma hiio tehe.

to perch a parrot or macaw on the end of a stick. hiiprai.

to begin to have heat, to start sweating. heyoshirayou.

they would have liked to tell him to do it with others. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

to participate in an activity, to do something with others, to be in the same state as others. topraoni.

then he slid down quickly to the base of the tree. a wãri kua kotheherima.

to slide down quickly along a tree trunk (in order to descend). kotheherima.

to toss an object in the air and catch it with the hand, to play by tossing an inflated bladder in the air and hitting it with the hand to prevent it from falling. mãii: lanzar al aire un objeto y recuperarlo con la mano, jugar entre varios a lanzar al aire una vejiga inﬂada y repetirla cada vez con la mano para evitar que caiga al suelo.

toss in the air and catch. mãii.

to stop giving goods, to no longer want to participate in trade exchanges. imarariyo.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. no yu.

to twist, to coil, to curl up. krete.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kãwããmo.

to catch the end of a fruit with the incisors and exert pressure to remove the seed from the shell. wãthemiprai.

scorpion. uhutima.

they danced, they participated in the presentation dance. the ki iriamoma, the pe praiama.

they danced, they participated in the presentation dance. iriamoma.

Do you have a child. wa ihirupi kua kure.

Child, come. ihiru, hapo.

child. ihiru.

the hallucinogens are mixed (= it is a mixture of hallucinogens). epena pe heshihiwe.

mixed, blended. heshihiwe.

he fell under the weight of the load, and remained crushed under it for a long time. a ha sheikuni a hikitao heatima (mit.

to have been compressed, flattened; to have remained pressed under an object for a long time. hikirei.

to cut several pieces to give away. pakekeakei.

cloudy, foggy. ihiroithawe.

pishipishimi namo: Zool. pishipishimi namo: Zool. , hummingbird, hermit; Phaethornis sp. , colibrí, ermitañito; Phaethornis sp. (Trochilidae). (Trochilidae).

hummingbird. pishipishimi.

to scratch oneself, to rub against. hãrikio.

to speak. hawathoko.

as the Yawari woman confused me, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

a Yawari woman (supernatural aquatic people). yãwãriyoma.

leaves used to make the roof of a dwelling and which, being found in distant places, require camping in the forest during their collection. fyãã hena henitiwe.

leaves used to make the roof of a dwelling and which, being found in distant places, require camping in the forest during their collection. henitiwe.

to frequently get tongue-tied while speaking. aka hãrehewe.

to get tongue-tied, to stammer. hãrehe.

to have spread, to have extended (surface), to have expanded. reraharayou.

to perforate, to make holes (durative 1). wareshai.

(habla de río arriba.). hãsini.

the son of Ter. ta perioprei, ihi ihirupini ware si re poape, ya wãhã thai ta nomihio sho.

to pronounce someone. sipoprai.

to be locally folded/pleated. wãhiã.

during their flight the hekura left marks of their passage in the vines. hekura pe ruu tehe wãkowãko thotho rekekamahe.

to leave footprints or marks of one. rekekekei.

(he/she/it) thinned the narrower ends (of arrows). ãikiãkei.

to thin the narrower end of the reed before inserting the feathers (of an arrow). ãikiãkei.

he possesses plantations and that is how he feeds himself. e naha re theka pe ha thaponi pe wãri iyai no thai.

possess, have. thapou.

He brought the dry leaves close (to the fire) and made them burn. yãã henaki shiriki ha ahetetamarini henaki wake piyemakema.

1. Exceed, go beyond. 2. Spread, extend (a fire). 3. Pass from one support to another.. piyeai.

to knead the cassava flour so that some liquid remains inside it. eramai.

wood that has been split in that way. yahekima no,: madera que ha sido partida de esa manera.

broken wood. yahekima.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small poles stuck around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, dwelling or camp by erecting a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or poles planted in the ground). ithorokomai.

the people of the red partridges in turn smeared themselves with the dye, and also painted the edges of their eyes and their feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

the two little partridges picked up a caterpillar hardened and deformed by cooking. pokorari ke kilarga kasha ke a ripi prithothowe re hokepirei.

a type of bird (possibly a partridge). pokorari.

to be beautiful, to grow well (only some plants). tiriria.

to start shaving one. mãrokoshipramor.

who has inclined the palm spathe where my seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yotehea.

I'm sweating (lit: the sweat comes out of me). ya heyoshi hai.

the burning heat of the house has spread. yahi a heyoshi he re toreparuhe ye.

to sweat, to become hot. heyoshii.

Jaguar quedó rezagado, y llegó debilitado por el hambre. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

debilitated by hunger. heokirioma.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

to deform and become a viscous mass due to heat, as happens when burning plastic or certain resins (e.g. mai koko); to become very angry (and . yorikãi.

to divide, separate, move away from others temporarily to live apart, definitively separate from the community to go live elsewhere. shekereai.

to tear into shreds, to shred. rehihiprou.

he hurried to burn the bees with burning leaves, broke the nest, knocked it down, and descended sliding quickly along the tree trunk. yetu oi a ha hisikiparuhuruni, a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai kukema.

he hurried to burn the bees with burning leaves. hisikiparuhuruni.

I am the one who will make it flee. kamiyeni ya wãri yashuu.

when the butterflies arrived they expelled the chigüires from their dwelling. hurari peni kayurifanari pe yashuprai re kupeheronowei henaki.

to put to flight, expel in anger from a place, dislodge; to reject the enemy. yashuu.

the one who habitually brings us fruits. el que nos trae habitualmente frutos.

brings. trae.

the váquiros forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

to force. wãre.

to roll up a rope. tishoshoai.

it is too full. ya wãcuentra demasiado lleno.

to be too full. wãcuentra.

when you dream Mahariri it scares you (= it gives you nightmares). wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi ahimari.

to dream, to see in dreams. poremou.

there is a lot of tobacco, when I have finished harvesting the high leaves of the plants, I will go away. pee ke nahe pe nohi kuatarou ha yaironi, ya the pe wai hisihisipi ha hititiprarini, ya nohi mohotua totihirayou.

the otter disappeared into a little hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuprou.

to disappear, to be forgotten, to go away, to get lost. nohi mohotu-.

swollen. hinchado.

to paint dots (durative). tipikou.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakaamai.

1. To become soft, sink, deform by softening or loosening (roof of a house, cassava bread, etc.). 2. To fall one after another, fall as dust, fragment and fall. wihihi.

a cool breeze passes by my sides from time to time. the wahari yakaroprao.

something presses against my sides from time to time. pesayakekerariyo.

you gave (to each one) two objects from the Whites. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru momo oshe pe ma kui riha.

to obtain, to get. yãhutar.

to adopt a form. torohe.

the lateral branches of the trees that are inclined towards the ground have hollow fruits. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni.

lateral branches of trees that are inclined towards the ground, have hollow fruits. yãhutãi.

I drank the water quickly, it was hot (= warm, referring to river water). mãu u ya u kotarema, u yopraoma.

to be hot, to have heat. yopraoma.

I shook my feet before lying in the hammock. Wake mamiki yaisi ama huu öke wake heri.

to shake or rub one. mamiki yaisi.

He went upriver. Ni wake huu.

upriver. ni.

it is far away. he yathehea.

to be far away, to be at a distance. yathehe.

to cook rapidly (plantain, root or tuber). homo.

to bite, to chew slowly (the tip of a long and resistant object to break it). weniki.

behavior of the. tuyemou.

to share the food of others. niithã.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani.

they shook several fruitless branches. ripukupiatarani.

to let something take a curved shape, to let something become curved. parokoamai.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

to deposit, to decant, to form a deposit. papeheai.

I plug the hole. ya theka kahuai.

Who will plug the hole. wetini theka kahuap e.

to obstruct an orifice, to plug a hole. kahuap.

to be constantly streaked by lightning (sky). ihãihãmou.

the movement of the back forward. aumodo.

to speak of upriver. oto.

at the site where the tree is divided into two branches. hi sherereope ha.

I fished at a place where there was a strip of sand parallel to the shore. mrakatahu a werereope ha yuri ya pe kããma.

where something is divided, split, or bifurcated. rereope.

to be completely skinned. tiprokoa.

he was the one who exterminated the váquiros. ware, ihini the ki mi re watheanowei (mit.

exterminate. watheanowei.

to have the face painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakiraw.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks (and abandon the camp) while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe (mit.

to push away repeatedly, to reject repeatedly. hirururei.

tortoise; Platemys platycephala (Chelidae). preshetomi.

to address the community loudly to express complaints, give an opinion on a matter, incite to work, relate a dream, etc.. patamorãyou.

to get hit without being able to retaliate. shepramou.

to accumulate, to gather in groups, to agglutinate; to cause a slight inflammation. shimokoremai.

to wait for the death of an animal. nomamarei.

you all do not demand any goods. mato hi ke wama ãhã poimi.

little brother, if there are chicks, we will claim one. oãsi kakara ihirupi ke pe kua ha, pehe a wãhã wãri pope.

to claim, to demand. wãha.

call your mother and let's hurry back home and also it can be The word 'ka' in Yanomami means '(grammatical particle)'. ka, pemaki koo ta haio.

call. ka.

he/she is my younger brother/sister. aiye ke a.

they killed their younger brother/sister. pe ai pe sheremahe.

younger sibling of the same sex; my younger brother (male speaker), my younger sister (female speaker). aiye.

factitive. to.

he cleared the way by pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand; to clear the way by pushing aside something obstructing the path. hãiprarini.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonami poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema.

stone axe. poo.

to mix, to be mixed. koni.

to reach a path one after another. he hapraai.

to emerge, protrude; to pass the head through a hole; to reach a path. hapraai.

to shed skin (snake), to molt (person). ukukou.

I divide the hishima fruit in two pieces (applying pressure with the hands). hishima ya kakaprai.

to open a door slightly; to open an exit by moving the logs that cover it (putting them on the sides). fy oka kakatai.

to tear, open, break, divide in two with the hand, divide game meat or fish into two portions. kakaprai.

is not that one who lives at the foot of Mount Mãroha the one who killed my relative. kihi mãroha siki pepi ha, ei a re peripe, ihi a ma kuini, ipa wa naki tea perei ma ta kuhawe.

mountain. Mãroha.

to clash against each other (speaking of the seed necklaces tied to the women's loincloth). tiritirimo.

to clash against each other (speaking of the seed necklaces tied to the women. tiritirimo.

while they were approaching, the demon of the shifting lands drew them in. pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

to approach, get close, draw near. ikuo.

open space, clearing. yakre.

to be locally cracked or split open. thepahai.

it is always he who procures goods for me. kama ke iha matohi ya pe shiro torerai.

1. To obtain goods habitually from a particular person or community. 2. To steal, take away (multiple objects). torererarei.

retomen tierra firme dispersándose. pe ta hashirio rãikiomopotu.

to disembark on land one after the other. hashiripraai.

give birth to a child. keprai.

to make war. tishikã.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered with longitudinal lines. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to trace several longitudinal lines, to scratch several times (longitudinally). shetitirei.

to improve the state of a sick person. wakakaamai.

to make noise by dragging. tãrãrãmo.

a variety of tobacco with broad leaves. tharathara.

in the moment when they took down the hammock of Miel. yãmonãmãriwe peki kushaihe ha.

they took down. kushaihe.

to be angry. tãrãkãomi.

to unfold, to smooth with the foot. kashishi.

while living. ya rãmi hunomi ya mamiki nikereo tehe tope e pe kuoma.

to mix, to blend, to associate (with people from different communities). nikereo.

to extend the wings. hehe.

to let the fruits spoil through negligence. eotoamai, caus.

spoil, rot. echar a perder.

to have gray hair (perfective). irepirayou.

you gave (to each one) two objects. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru momo oshe pe ma kui riha.

to take, give or receive two objects at a time. yãhuei.

What relation do you have with my younger brother, to whom I give shelter. kihi feesheye ya nohi re thaapraiwei iha, weti naha wa e kuu totihia kurawe.

to give shelter. thaapraiwei.

to be mixed (members of different communities, objects of different nature). koyokowe.

See prukima. pukuye ãsi.

See prukima. pukuye.

he is happy. reroma kosihi.

to be happy. reroma.

the fire is extinguished. koa wake misi ãkikiwe.

tight, narrow. wãkikiwe.

to be extinguished (a fire), to be tight/narrow. ãkikiwe.

my ear unblocked. ya yimikaki homoprariyoma.

the palm spathe opened (releasing the flowers). rasha ãthe homoprariyoma.

1. Explode, detonate, burst open; unblock (the ear). 2. Appear from behind clouds or mist (the sun). 3. Open lengthwise, split or tear open (palm spathe, banana leaf, etc.). 4. Germinate, sprout.. homoprou.

to paint one. yãtãi.

to strain to defecate or fart. wãthemo.

to stick out the tongue. tepa.

to be very bitter. koãmi.

to begin to fly (a bird). maparuheni.

to paint transverse lines on the body; to draw a transverse line on something/someone; to scratch transversely. tiprutu.

noise made by a more or less hard object inside a rigid container when shaken: noise of lechosa seeds, noise of chicks in the egg when shaken, etc. rokorokomorayou.

my niece, the daughter of my sister, the wife of my son. yuha.

to be angry. tãrãkãomi.

there where Titiri was perched, he possessed the darkness. titiri a re roowei ha, titititi a thapoma (mit.

the night, the darkness. titititi.

the path splits into several others. yo shererewe.

to divide, split into parts. nini*.

yo partiré mañana. henaha ya huheripe.

mañana ustedes se divertirán. henaha ke wamaki iriamope.

pasado mañana. fai the henaha.

tomorrow. huheripe.

to start exercising a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, in order to break or grab. yãmoniprai.

the child no longer spoke, he was stiff (dead). ihiru ke a matha re waitapariyowei, ihiru ke a wai kasheshea waikirayouwei ha.

to become rigid; to straighten up (an object). kasheshou.

to express oneself using a. kahira.

teeth of picures. fthomi nape.

teeth. fthomi.

Murciélago, que vivía en tiempos remotos, murió. hewethawe ke a hapa re perionowei, a nomãrãyoma.

Bat (a mythological figure). hewethawe.

forked branch. fhiki pakaraa.

tree branches. fhii hiki p o k o.

branch. fhiki.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to decrease a lot before going to kill fish in it. thookoramai.

al que ladra, colócalo alrededor de mi cuello (= dame un perro). hei a re houhoumouwei, pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

neck (more specifically). houhoumouwei.

give birth to a child. keprai.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to have sleepiness, to feel sleepy. kokãrã.

the Waika put smoke in Yotenama's den to suffocate him. waika ke pe yotenama pe re yareiwehei.

they put smoke (to suffocate). yareiwehei.

to be in a slightly more fluid state than thick and pasty (like yogurt). thepehehe.

I have opened the path there (going around the obstacle). iha pei ya mayo pahetia ãyoã shoareherima.

Jaguar took another path and made a long detour. ãyoyo shomi ke yoka ha ira ke a pata ãyoãtaroma.

to go around, to bypass, to make a detour. yo.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

steadied. afianzó.

to dent an object (in one place). wãikãmai.

both of us are ugly and bad, and we have insulted each other. peheki wãri wãritiwe yahatuayou totihio ke a kuhe.

to insult each other. yahatuayou.

female spirit associated with powerful hallucinogens. royo.

you (pl. wamaki mi waitheri nonoomi.

to be a coward. nonopraomi.

you will transport the blood in the pot (making several round trips). hapoka si ha wa kore pe teaprarei.

you will transport (something) in the pot (making several round trips). teaprarei.

some, a few. porukutawe.

to pass a bad night, to sleep poorly or not sleep at night. hihirimou.

to flatten the surface of a piece of wood by striking it obliquely, to flatten a knot in the wood in this way. pahaye.

plant from which part of the rhizome has been removed. tikaroma.

headache. yayu.

to cause to feel sleepy. maharishimai.

they left in a hurry. pe shi hariwe re huokeiwei.

they left in a hurry. huokeiwei.

to help. thãrima.

don't laugh at me. yare noka ikãi mai.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãma.

to laugh mockingly, to make fun of someone by laughing. ikãmai.

the ancestors who lived in other times (in different places) transformed. perihonowei the peni pe shi wãrihoma.

to transform, metamorphose. wãrihoma.

dejar secar, prender fuego y esparcir las brasas. shirikimarini, wake yerini, wa ha yãrãreãrini.

to leave to dry. shirikimarini.

to become smooth, to become smooth and moist. frakaha.

to shiver, tremble with fever; to have convulsions. prisiprisimo.

they are aligned (they are grouped in a row). the hirao wirinawe.

to be perched side by side (birds). wirinawe.

the fat causes nausea. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to cause nausea, to provoke the urge to vomit. harihamai.

to knock down multiple objects with a stick. rekerarei.

to make or allow something or someone to be put in a certain position; to make or allow something to be done in a certain place. -taamaki.

to become blunt, to lose sharpness. wahoto.

renunciar a un ataque, renunciar a querer matar a alguien. nape kuyeagresión.

aggression. kuyeagresión.

to shoot a rihu masi arrow. rihu masi tiheheai.

the demons took away my son (lit. yai theni rihuye masi yepirei kuhe.

small thin arrow made of palm wood with the tip hardened in fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. rihuye.

to empty little by little. mathokoai.

to do it quickly. tiketaai.

jigua tree. kumato hi.

jigua tree. kumato.

to receive a piece broken in that way. wahathopei.

they renounced/gave up in each place. the pe tiraatarama.

they renounced/gave up in each place. tiraatarama.

to scratch, to rub against. hãriki.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was shaking where the others were passing through. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

to move or shake foliage while passing through. hushuhushu.

the Waika missed the bird of prey several times in a row. waika peni koikoimi ke a posi hore waaprai ta kuraheni.

to miss (a shot). kuraheni.

tree. anahi.

According to mythology, where a story opposes it to bees (which are associated with fire), the opossum represents stench, ugliness and putrefaction; it is at the origin of sorcery and the use of deadly magical plants; from its blood comes the diversity of colors of bird plumage, that is, zoological variety. Según la mitología, donde un relato lo opone a las abejas (que se asocian con el fuego), el rabipelado representa el hedor, la fealdad y la putrefacción; está en el origen de la hechicería y de la utilización de plantas mágicas mortíferas; de su sangre proviene la diversidad de colores del plumaje de las aves, es decir, la variedad zoológica.

rabipelado (opossum). aware.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). waramashi.

they burn one after another. pe ishioprou.

to burn repeatedly, to burn one after another. ishio.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to carry something under the arm, to carry an object tucked between the skin and the loincloth; to keep an object pressed. hãkip.

tomorrow morning we will descend from the mountain. henaha pemaki yohoo henaokiriop e.

we will descend from the mountain tomorrow morning. henaokiriop.

to strain to defecate or fart. wãthemorayou.

to extinguish a fire located in the central plaza. ãkikimapei.

to peel the yopo grains. hiprushai.

arch yourself. a mi ta yãpreketaru.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãprekeprou.

to search for crabs by putting one's hand in their holes. oko hupai.

I'm going to search for crabs. oko ya pe wai ta hupaheri sho.

to touch a place after another. hupeatarai.

to form a concavity (surface). hopokoprou.

to rise (level). huyuku.

to protest, to react to an unpleasant situation, to defend oneself during an altercation. wãriprai.

the survivors fled far away. prahai hami the pe wai shee tokurayoherima.

survivors. tokurayoherima.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

honey. shapomi.

there were mosquitos (supernatural) in the waterfall. yawaramapiwei a pora ha peti naki rooma.

there were mosquitos (supernatural). yawaramapiwei.

you have an ugly head. wa he wãri towemi.

to be sick, to be in poor physical condition. towem.

I did not delay in walking bent over (because of the pain), and I staggered. yetu re ya haototou ha totihioni, ya wekekou kuaaherima.

1. To bend one. haototou.

to be hungry. taamari.

she put the two gallinetas to cook and hung them (over the fire). i ha yaumakini.

gallinetas (type of bird). yaumakini.

wayamou, ceremonial dialogue. oithãpari.

there where the lower course of the Orinoco sinks underground, that is where they (two) will live from now on. mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

where the lower course of the Orinoco River sinks underground. totihiokiriope.

they discovered the danta (tapir) made into pieces, lying (at the bottom of the ravine). shama ke a pata kopehewe praa re tararewehei.

they discovered. tararewehei.

to turn one. fririhitou.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. okakei.

to shorten a strap. yekehiai.

when you gathered the bones of the cremated dead, did you search carefully (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

to search carefully for scattered fragments mixed with other material. prorururei.

they live in dwellings situated next to each other. pe peria poaa.

to be or put next to each other. poaa.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

builds. construye.

to go ahead of someone. heturei.

to be placed in parallel (next to each other or on top of each other). werereai.

to become wrinkled, flabby or crumpled (locally). wãprete.

amontonen las hojas, ¡nosotros las esparciremos de nuevo. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to spread, extend. patheri.

to become pointed, sharpened, cutting; to become rough or coarse. namoãi.

to call out to them. areremo vb.

to call out to. areremo.

as they were numerous they were crowded below, on the ground. pe the pe mathe pe ohotaa ha yaithoni.

numerous. thethea.

species of arrow that the hekura possess. hatakoãmi.

he tied the gallinetas (birds) one next to the other and carried them on his back. hãshimo ke kipi parekerema.

he carried two plucked paujíes (birds) one against the other, he gave them to the woman. paruri e kipi roshi ha parekereni, suwe ke iha e kipi hipekema (mit.

to tie two objects of the same type together and carry them on one. parekereni.

to make limp. kayeheamai.

hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei: the children climbed the trees (with rings placed around their ankles). hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei: los niños se trepaban a los árboles (con argollas colocadas alrededor de los tobillos).

eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit. ): in turn, Woodpecker climbed right away. ): a su vez, Pájaro carpintero trepó enseguida.

1. to climb; 2. to roll (a round object); 3. to steal, take away (several objects). torere.

there is a lot of fishing line (rolled up). matiriawe a sute.

to be thick, dense, compact (everywhere). taprawe.

Acne started appearing on my face. shoko ya mi pe shohepi moãi.

to appear. shoke.

to have been incinerated. rãmomarei.

they wear old worn-out loincloths. wayuko yãpishipi pe rapouhe.

to wear out, deteriorate (a fabric). yãpishipiãi.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to bend, curve, or fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. thorukuprou.

the woman's breasts were erect and firm, she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. suwe hãkãmiki ha sherereikuni, suwe ke a yokoapraroma.

to be erect and firm (referring to a woman. sherereikuni.

high riverbank carved by the current. hishio no.

high riverbank carved by the current. ishio.

imitate, parody, mimic someone; measure (the length of something), evaluate (a quantity), count. owe-.

to bristle (feathers or hair). mãririãi.

they hurried to go in search of pijiguaos. rasha ke ki shi toaprarou.

they are the ones who want to go to war without delay (and for the slightest reason). shitou si ihehewe totihiwe ke the pe.

to hurry, to rush to do something. toaprarou.

to those paujíes with red butts perched there, they want to skin their crests. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

crest and neck skin of a bird (paují). mãruki.

to wrinkle, to wilt. ãpreteãi.

to open (an object). pawehe.

the water began to boil. u yorupema.

began to boil. yorupema.

to have an infected eye. mamo ripupiai.

to infect. ripu.

sap of the hosho nouhi tree. hosho noupe.

sap, resin. noupe.

to leave someone with their hand extended without taking what they offer (because one is angry or feels hatred). imiki totomapou.

to leave someone with their hand extended without taking what they offer (because one is angry or feels hatred). totomapou.

to tear by the middle. ikeke.

to toast or dry as quickly as possible. fshirishiri.

if you insist on going there, you will let yourself be killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini, wa shemoparu (mit.

to let oneself be killed at the edge of the water. shemopariyo.

tomorrow morning we will descend (from the mountain). henaha pemaki yohoo henaokiriope.

to descend, to go down. yohoo.

the man was vigorously tightening Siroromi. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to tighten, to compress forcefully. ãkikirayou.

we put the arrow to dry (at the water's edge). yama a mi shereka hai re kupeiwei.

to dry. kupeiwei.

vine; Canavalia sp. (Leg., Fabaceae). thoki.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). peupeu.

"try it, you two", said Toucan. kahe ke wahekini the ta wapepraapi.

try it, you two. wapepraapi.

to scrape wood locally by striking it obliquely with a cutting instrument, to work a wooden surface in that way. pakoko.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, do not bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to rub, to place against, to slide along; to knock an object out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikirei.

to make vomit. yoruhamai.

the manioc flour is toasted (to make casabe bread). nashi hi rãmamou.

to toast, to roast. rãmamou.

to twist the trunk repeatedly. ãihiãihimou.

to start unbalancing a container by loading it more on one side than the other. eotoprai.

plant (unidentified). kosipanama.

to move along the visible side of an elevation (when previously on the non-visible side, in relation to the place one is going). parikiprou.

to move along the visible side of an elevation. parikiprou.

water strider. motohewe.

when the light (of the lantern) turns red, do not believe (you two) that it will return to normal. ke ki sh wakeai kukema, ke ki sh kuprou koowe puhi kupii mai.

light. koowe.

to be full. omopotu.

Noise produced by. tootoomo.

estar siempre riéndose, reírse varias veces seguidas. ikãoprou.

to laugh. ikã-.

they ate it. a waremahe.

they ate it. waremahe.

to pull. pathemarei.

they had made the trunk of air between the tongue and teeth swell, called that is made by whistling in that way. apia ke hi hurumarei no kureshi.

to make swell, to make dilate. hurumarei.

sharp (a bamboo tip). hirorowe.

deception, pretense; to pretend; to carry out an activity. horehore : engaño, ﬁngir i , horashi, mi hora, yare, yoke miento; aparentar que; realizar una actividad.

deception, pretense. horehore.

he does not do like the others. shoati ke a.

Said of a person whose behavior departs from the usual norms.. shoati.

the leaves of the wakata tree scream like spider monkeys. wakata henaki re pashomorãkiri.

to imitate the behavior of the spider monkey to cure a person whose vital image is that animal; to imitate the shrill cry of the spider monkey during an attack or to receive guests. noreshimou.

parrot. weheri.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks (plural subject). hãikãmou.

at the edge of the water and also it can be The word 'o' in Yanomami means 'reflexive/middle voice marker'. fpei u kasi hami.

I scratch myself (once) with the nails. ya tikokoo.

periphery, edge, shore, bank. o.

to become as big as, to become equal to (in quantity, in height); to align. husukou.

to form a callus. poshoai.

to begin to grow large (a tobacco plant). kumamasiprou.

he was on guard and watching the trembling of the tree (lit. the hi tiikou mima.

to fill up to the brim. hiekemakei.

they thought it was a baba (type of animal) and struck the otter with their bows. proro a ma kui ha iwa a hore puhiheni a tiwehamahe.

to believe, to think that, to be convinced of. puhiheni.

null. krukukumi.

they were damaged/deteriorated/ruined (perfective, plural subject). wãritirariyoma.

clay pot. hapoka.

to modify the direction of a canoe by giving small lateral paddle strokes from the rear of the boat. hããmãi.

to fish with a fishing line (jokingly). matiriawe kãpou.

to fish with a fishing line (jokingly). kãpou.

la flecha rozó las plumas del hormiguero cantador que revolotearon. wãshoshoremi re upe wai ha tishishirarini upe wai shiyaam a.

revolotear. tishishirarini.

el crepúsculo cayó cuando él llegó al Monte-de-los-Saltamontes. sekisekimapiwei the hehu hami a he weyama.

Monte-de-los-Saltamontes (a place name). ekisekimapiwei.

extend one's arms towards a loved one. imiki poshoko.

extend one. poshoko.

I dyed the cotton red. Keprai wake here.

to dye red, to make something red. keprai.

to have vertigo regularly. shiwãrihiwe.

calm down. a ta yãnikitaru.

to calm down, become tranquil, stop being agitated. yãniki.

it was because I defended myself alone that I am still alive. kamiye re ya nohi ha peyeoni ya rii t e m i.

to defend oneself. peyerayou.

It didn't take them long to quickly approach (by walking fast) the place (where they were going). yetu ke the urihi ahetetaremam a h e: no les llevó mucho tiempo acercarse (caminando rápido) al lugar (adonde iban).

to quickly shorten the distance. ahetetai.

(transformed into) snake, it immediately coiled up on itself. oru a pororoa shoakema.

to coil, curl up, roll into a ball (reptile, animal falling asleep). pororoa.

he fell and cried out in pain. a ha kerini, a rããmorayoma.

cried out in pain. rããmorayoma.

say that to deceive. wa nomohori ha kuni.

to invite someone under false pretenses in order to kill them or take their women. omohorirei.

to pluck a bird; to burn the fur of an animal before butchering and cooking it. mi fukukuai.

to pluck a bird; to burn the fur of an animal before butchering and cooking it. fukukuai.

to make or allow something or someone to be put in a certain position; to make or allow something to be done in a certain place. -taamaki.

to wait for fruits to soften in order to harvest or eat them. prehepiamai.

yes, that's what has to be done. aye minahami.

that. minahami.

to direct or incline the tip of an object towards the ground, to make hang, to cause a depression or sinking. wereamai.

the leaves wet with dew just brush against you, but nevertheless they remove the down (stuck on your hair). henaki pakihou peo ma kui, yetu horoi ke ki wai heomopotayou.

they remove the down (stuck on your hair). heomopotayou.

to separate a portion of meat by breaking it off with the hand, in order to offer it; to take a bit of tobacco from one. hakokoai.

life. vida.

he shouted to call the others because he no longer remembered the path. ai the pe rii ha a komima, yo puhi hatukeprai ha maoni.

not remember anymore (something concrete and specific). hatukeprai.

to become completely reddened by the sun. heteteprou.

to finish stinking/rotting. hithãriprou.

to draw a line. shetitiai.

(he) transported a large rock on the shoulder. maa ke ma pata makepoherima.

transported (something) on the shoulder. makepoherima.

to become dark (visibility). rumãhãtou.

to mix or stir (a liquid) once. tikoreprai.

we were building shelters for the night when those who had gone to kill fish arrived in turn. yamaki perimou tehe iha pe mi hetuai, yuri pe re niyaiwehei.

to arrive after others. heturayou.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe.

Supernatural beings associated with the glowworm. Amakurithawe.

1. (verb intransitive) to shorten after repeated shocks, to become a member of a community (obsolete word); 2. (verb transitive) to fabricate a short bamboo arrowhead, to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (if damaged). theek.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to turn an object making it describe an angle of 180°, to invert the sides or ends. hemihiãi.

they prepared totumas, since they wanted to consume pijiguao porridge on the way. horokoto a kopemahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

they prepared, divided into pieces, smoothed the shaft of a bow or carved bamboo tips. kopemahe.

I removed the ocumos (from the boiled water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to remove debris that has fallen into water or food by catching it with something (a stick, a spoon, etc.); to remove, extract several objects in the indicated manner. hikeprai.

speech from upriver. frararami masi.

speech from upriver. frararami.

I got down from the hammock several times to rekindle the fire. ya ha ithotoni, koa ya wake pe yetaai kuperei.

to rekindle a fire. yetaai.

to roll up a rope. tishoshoai.

the day arrives again (lit. yamaki he wakakai koã.

to be in a certain place at dawn. wakakai.

we will catch up with them (after having traveled a certain distance). yama e ki waroaharayou.

indicates that an act will be carried out at another place, at a certain distance from the place of utterance. aharu.

the river is rising. u petii.

to be full; to be satisfied; to be swollen (watercourse). petii.

ground chili pepper. yãimoro hki.

I absorbed the spicy drink of the foreigners. nape ya no yãimoropi u koama.

ground chili pepper. yãimoro.

to have the habit of being found near a certain place at a certain time of day. aheoprou.

when he arrived at the river bank he sat for a moment. pei u kasi hami a waroo tehe a wãri rotapariyoma.

sat for a moment. rotapariyoma.

(Ellos) fueron a coger ajíes. huko mo co a coger ajíes.

Mientras las desenterraban, las batatas cantaban como tucanes. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe, huko mo pe mayepimowa pu; tahiapi a ta hukepa, ya the ta wapa.

Coger, arrancar, cosechar un fruto. yoinc.

I soak the wapu fruits. wapu ya ki he paoai.

to submerge, cover with water, make wet. paoai.

thanks to the soap, it will certainly become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

soap. fapomi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco river). pita.

don't lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

to die, to kill. nomari.

when we get tired of living in the forest we return to the communal dwelling. yamaki periai ha mohipraruni yamaki kooma.

to abandon the communal dwelling to live temporarily elsewhere. periai.

Baba escupió el fuego cuando se pusieron a reir; wake hopraretahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waima. poreri toiwariwe ke a wãri ikãprarou tehe, wake hopraretahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waima.

they began to laugh. toiwariwe.

edible seed of the platanillo plant. mokohe.

He is not moving at all, maybe I killed him. a wãri ãtiãmi, pe wãri waikoma tao.

to be motionless, not to move. ãti.

to do it quickly. wãhewãhemou.

to choose, select; to flatten, make flat. makeherayou.

that can be shared, divided. shereramou.

habla del sur del Orinoco. kãrãpã.

jo, déjame bajar (de tu espalda). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit. sin. ): hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

to offer, give in addition. ithomai.

each will spread them out again. pe the patherio koope ke.

again. koope.

he is afraid. ihiru yimothaki.

to be afraid. yimothaki.

to be afraid. mamoku.

to hold with the hand, to transport an object holding it with the hand. hohi.

to get stuck in (something). ya tokuu te.

to get stuck. te-.

as the woman was in love with him, he fled with her. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

to make a woman flee or facilitate her escape; to flee in the company of a woman one loves. wahikei.

there is honey (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

there is honey (I discovered it some time ago). kupohorurei.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly under or above a surface, to move under the surface of the water, behind the clouds (celestial body). urururãyou.

to have the face painted black (perfective form). ishimokei.

two women have just arrived at your house, and have sat there. ahe ke nahi ha suwe ke kipi roa katitipeherou kuhe.

they (two women) have gone to sit directly at your hearth. katitipeherou.

the tortuga bit forcefully the throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

to suck, to aspirate. shoaaruni.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

deposit. papeheprou.

slowly Danta passed (from the tree where it was perched) to a yagrumo tree. kahu ke usi ha shama ke a pata opi re piyekeiwei (mit.

to pass (without descending) from one tree to another. piyekei.

you keep quiet. wãno ke pe hiriaprai ha.

to be silent, to keep quiet. hiriaprai.

let's eat now. hei tehe pemaki ta iya.

he just left. hei tehe a hurayoma.

from now on I have no intention of allowing our goods to be given away (to visitors). hei tehe kamiyeni ya matohipi no hipeamapimi totihiwe.

now, at once, immediately. peam.

I got burned in a fire, that's how I got fat. kai wake ha ya ha yaponi, ya pata prerayou kurei (mit.

got fat, developed (plural subject). prerariyo.

si no preparan un ovillo de algodón no obtendrán una olla grande. ana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

preparar. wama.

the ancestors found refuge under the cacao trees. pohoroa ana hiki ha patapi ke pe he ruo ta no kuperaheshini.

they did not know plantains and ate only soil. kuratha a tai mahei, ei a pitha shiro wai ta no kuperaheshini.

to find refuge, to take shelter. kuperaheshi.

mother-in-law, go get water so I can drink. yape, miha mãu u ta yakea, ya u ta koa.

I go to get water. mãu ya u yakeai.

to get (using a container), to go get water. yakea.

to extract a piece from a whole by cutting (hitting). pakaroai.

it is said of the smoke that rises inside a dwelling. poyukai.

to hesitate, to vacillate. rãikiki.

to compress. ãkiki.

bite my nose. yare hu ta opari.

you will not be able to break my head with your teeth. yare he oprai mai ke the.

to bite, to eat (a round object). opa.

it is traversed. shi pratapratamou.

to be traversed. pratapratamo.

to make oneself dry by someone. hãhimou.

he had the intention to participate in a war expedition, that's why he returned home. ya niya ha wayu funi ya koo kuprerei.

to participate in a war expedition. kuprerei.

(synonym, used upriver). rumãhã.

the old man that I killed in the war. fipa ya si re turekeaprai.

to tie a monkey. keaprai.

to paint one. yãtãi.

I do not work, I pass the time doing nothing. ya oﬁ puﬁpou tao tharei.

to pass the time doing nothing, being idle. puﬁpou.

when a hunter kills one of those birds, he has to undergo the ritual of homicides (u n okaimou). cuando un cazador mata a uno de esos pájaros, tiene que someterse al ritual de los homicidas (u n okaimou).

ritual of homicides. unokaimou.

he moved away a little in the forest. urihi hami the re payekepayekekeiwei.

to move away a little, to travel a certain distance. payekepayekekeiwei.

to make an object thin; to thin out. repisiprai.

The termites have eaten the wood. Ipe huu kori a wakeprawe.

termites, aggressive ant species. ipe.

species of bamboo (unidentified). thora u siki.

suweheri designates a boy of 12-14 years old (pubescent or prepubescent). suweheri designa a un muchacho de 12-14 años (púber o prepúber).

young boy. suweheri.

there was a hammock of vines decorated with several transverse stripes, it was hung up in the middle. thoopi thoku tiprutuwe yãoma, thoopi thoku mi wereoma.

hung up in the middle, directed towards the ground. wereoma.

(he) wanted to see if there were seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open or gut an animal by slitting its abdomen longitudinally. eririrei.

where he/she/it was. edonde.

attract someone's attention by making a sucking sound. aka sukusukumou.

to attract someone. sukusukumo.

they already killed several enemies. pe the matoﬁ yuoprou waikia ke a kuhe.

to kill enemies (lit.: to take possession of goods). yuoprou.

I put the game meat in water (to cook it). yaro ya kããi.

to soak, to macerate (multiple objects). kãmãi.

to deform the edge of a tool by striking it against hard objects. shokekamai.

to splash once. ishiai.

when I am like this under the effect of hallucinogens, I usually fight against the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after the other all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

to repeatedly perform the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects at different times; can also connote a frequentative; equivalent to -opro- for intransitive verbs. wãrii.

fruit of the seje palm. ohaprua.

it is our (of us two) conuco. kamiye peheki hikaripi theka.

it is our (of us two) house. kamiye peheki yãnopi.

our (of us two). peheki.

because he is brave he is generous. pe perio ke yaro a shi ihite.

a brave man. fperio.

the visitors no longer come because they do not give anything in return for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

visitors, those who walk on paths when traveling. mrarihe.

the onoto dye was mixed with bark to perfume it, that's why it's shiny. fei nana pe e no kapino, e no kapino fa totiﬁoni, ei re e noshi tererewe.

perfumed onoto dye. kapino.

to widen progressively towards the edge the wall of an object while making it (canoe, vessel, basket, etc.). eheteai.

he slid behind the women's backs. suwe ke pe yaipe hami a wãri hiririãprarou.

the back. hiririãprarou.

to arch, to be arched; to be lying back due to a load with too short a strap (the load rests on the kidneys instead of the buttocks). mi krehetheo.

to arch, to bend backwards. krehethe.

to help (him/her). tharipiki (pei).

to help. tharipiki.

to begin to draw a curved line from one ear to the other across the forehead on someone. tiwaroprai.

small hole left by a parasite in the skin after being extracted. wanoka.

to develop a new bark after losing the old one (tree). sikãrãyou.

(he) shoots an arrow. ya ma niniweini re ya the ha ma.

to shoot an arrow. niniweini.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepirayou.

they were mourning (crying for a dead person). the pe wãyoãmoma.

to be angry, to mourn. wãyoãmou.

we, those who pass (the river), are the people of Shitoshito. s h i s h ito theri yamaki re hayuope (mit.

those who pass (the river). Shitoshito.

Jaguar cayó (ruidosamente), y el pájaro minero (creyendo que era el trueno) se puso a cantar. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

pájaro minero; Lipaugus vociferans (Tyrannidae). atawa.

ant. ninipe.

to dye. teñir.

the kinkajou's shaman. hãshoriwe hekura.

mythological ancestor of the kinkajou. hãshoriwe.

ashes of the korori hi tree (southern Orinoco dialect). korori unaki.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekeray.

I'm going. ya koo.

let's hurry to leave. pemaki koo ta haio.

to go, to go back, to return, to come back. oprou.

I split the hishima fruit in two (applying pressure with my hands). hishima ya kakaprai.

to open a door slightly; to open an exit by moving aside the logs that block it (putting them to the sides). fyoka kakatai.

to tear, rip, break, split in two with the hand, divide game meat or fish into two portions. kakaprari.

to cook a food item in this way in order to give it as a gift. rãmikei.

to swell (belly); to reach the last stage of growth (banana). yaheheai.

to clean an object, make white, paint or color white. ãweãweprarou.

they never said 'kill him with arrows'. a nowã thai maomahe.

to kill with an arrow. maomahe.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much. paroho.

to move, to displace imitating someone. oweatarai.

but it has been a long time since I ate fruits. yama pe ya ki nohi warei kurei.

to sit in the water with legs spread apart. tiemwãri.

I am afraid. krokema ãsi.

to be afraid. krokema.

brother-in-law, when they move they seem to be as robust as you. shori, ei kahe ke wa wãri mimou re kure naha the pe kãi rohothoaprarouhe.

they seem to be as robust as you. rohothoaprarouhe.

some quickly reach the other bank (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

to reach the high part of a riverbank (floodwaters). iheteteai.

to have a recurring headache. yayumou.

here it really is not healthy (= there is an epidemic). fhei the wãri okehai ma re mai.

to lose power or effect (of hallucinogens, tobacco, magic substances, curare, etc.). okehai.

in a place where the ground was bulging, there were manaka palm trees. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha manaka si pe kuoma.

convex, rounded, bulging. yepihi.

formed, developed (protuberance, swelling, etc.). orãpirãyou.

¿vas a comer. wa re iyarayoi.

to eat. iyarayoi.

to be insistent by nature. he prakehewe.

keep your bow tensed. nahi ta iyopou.

to tense a bow, to keep a hammock hung up. iyopou.

little boy, young male relative (son, brother, parallel cousin). mokawe.

la pasarela se hundió bajo el agua cuando pasé sobre ella (para cruzar el río). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

pasarela, troja. ihiraki.

dry. weheprawe.

they penetrated the conuco (they crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hayuoma.

to pass in front of someone. hayuo.

Yotenamariwe went quickly towards his den. pei pe pekapi ha yotenamariwe ke a pata rahurahua ha yaiikiyoni.

den, lair, cave. rahurahua.

they did not manage to easily lift the large rock. no lograron levantar fácilmente la gran roca.

they managed. lograron.

ashiashirimi: that which is yellow or brown in color. ashiashirimi: aquello que es de color amarillo o marrón. This name is given to the blue macaw (Ara ararauna) and the red-rumped curassow (mãru), whose ventral feathers are brown, to distinguish them from the paruri, which has white ventral feathers. Se le da este nombre a la guacamaya azul (Ara ararauna) y al paují culo rojo (mãru), cuyas plumas ventrales son marrones, para distinguirlas del paruri, que tiene las plumas ventrales blancas.

yellow or brown in color. ashias.

you will go to ask for arrows from one hearth to another. shereka wa pe nakai mi athope.

to go from hearth to hearth, to make the rounds of the central plaza going from one hearth to another. athope.

even though we kept surrounding the gallineta (bird), it remained visible. kui, a taproimi (mit.

visible. innashomi.

to burn the fur/feathers of an animal before butchering and cooking it. fukukurei.

edible fruit of the koteko hi tree. koteko.

to cause disappointment to someone (by refusing to give them something). pepramai.

to be partially rolled up in a spiral; to be folded (the edge of an object). yapurea.

the river is rising. u petii.

filled; satiated; swollen (river). petirariyo.

block, obstruct. ka komã.

noise made by a more or less hard object inside a rigid container when shaken: noise of lechosa seeds, noise of chicks in the egg when shaken, etc. rokorokomorayou.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise. yimirãimi.

to trace a curved line from one ear to the other across the forehead on someone. tiwaroai.

Kãrãnãri will make you fall. kãrãnãrini wa kemarei.

Supernatural being of the yai the class; kicks those who climb trees and makes them fall. Kãrãnãri.

to loosen, slacken, stretch out (inchoative). prihããi.

to loosen, slacken, stretch out. ihã.

to start helping. payeriprai.

thanks to the soap, no doubt it will become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to have become completely clean or white. auprariyo.

to take, obtain two objects. porakarei.

to be a little long (arrow). tirehewe.

brother-in-law, represent things lucidly, when you achieve it, manifest your anger. shoriwe a puhi ta wararaparu, wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

to arrive at (after a moment of uncertainty). wararaprou.

come quickly to start tying it. eyeha a wãri okãprari ta hairoyo.

to begin tying, to start tying. okãprari.

to have already finished doing something. romirãyou.

to lose visual acuity. moyepiprou.

The (cut off) head rolled towards her husband, whom she followed. pe heãropi ke ihami pei ke the he pruruu nosi yauai yaioma (mit.

towards. ihami.

before these trees are cut down we will gather the seeds (of the hallucinogenic hisiomi) and inhale them. temi re hi uprao tehe peheki ha hãmoãrini, pehe a koararei.

to gather, to collect. temi.

to be getting oneself painted with a curved line going from one ear to the other across the forehead. tiwaromou.

to carry a splendid attire; to be very beautiful. noshi hari.

don't hit them (the bats, with your arrows) or the okã will come. pe he yoatihe, okã ke pe.

to hit on the head with a stick (a person, an animal), to strike with the end of an elongated object (stick or arrow), to hit flying animals with the end of one or more arrows. yoapei.

to stick, adhere (food during cooking). sutipei.

here is where it appeared for the first time. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

they arrived and gathered. e pe re shimoopareyorunowei.

directional suffix. -yoru.

that the demons of the morning hurry up (lit. waikana theri pe shi ta hariprarukiri.

to be impatient; to hurry, to rush. shi hari.

he is a man of mature age, one of those shamans who regularly inhale hallucinogens. pata ke a, prowehewe eoko (habla del sur del Orinoco.

age. edad.

at the end of a long moment the noise they made returning through the foliage was heard again. ihiwe pe the pe re shararamou koimaperei.

to buzz; to crackle. shararamou.

to be afraid. pehihi.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. Maatha.

above all, do not come back visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

to adopt a perpendicular position to the ground; to reach the zenith (a star); to stand up. yororokei.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama (mit.

inflated, dilated, swollen (perfective aspect). shuwerayou.

to stain or spot in a precise place. hayapishikei.

they killed the person whose son lives in another community. ihi re ihirupi hoã wãri perihou ma re kui pe wãri sherema ha tharahei.

to live in another place, to live in another community. perihou.

to make a basket. kreema natoshi.

to make. natoshi.

Õmawe advanced crouched (so as not to be seen), and squatted. omawe a ha teretereikuni, a yerekema.

to crouch, to squat. yerekema.

I am going to eat. mamohiyomi.

I'm going to look for awarakurimi fruits. awarakurimi ya ki toai.

edible fruit of the awarakurimi tree, harvested often in large quantities during the rainy season. awarakurimi.

brother-in-law. kuyão.

to start to turn something over, to start to invert something. hemihiprai.

to be always. shoaaprarai.

spirit associated with the red brocket deer. preãriãthawe.

the clusters of pijiguaos are numerous and well-stocked, do not touch them (= do not steal them). pe ki shikoprawe.

well-stocked, loaded, full. shikoprawe.

to remain in that way for a long time. wariritao.

as it became night (and they could not see anything), they scattered their belongings. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikamahe.

night, darkness. titioni.

the cassava is easy to grate (lit. nashi kokoku te pe hir ik ãmou epehewe.

behavior of a material when it is rubbed, grated, scraped, or rubbed. hirikãmou.

to start perforating, piercing, or opening something. horoshoprai.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to turn an object making it describe an angle of 180°, to invert the sides or ends. hemihiãi.

the dusk fell when he arrived at the Mountain-of-the-Grasshoppers. sekisekimapiwei the hehu hami a he weyama.

Mountain-of-the-Grasshoppers. sekisekimapiwei.

a very dangerous wãrihotho demon will lodge in the body of a beautiful Yãnomãmi. yãnomãmi riyehewe ke the rii ha wãrihotho wãritiwe ke a niya shatio totihia kure (cha.

a dangerous supernatural malefic being that lodges in the body of the sick. wãrihotho.

buttocks of a child. oragas.

estaban raptando a su hermana y él permanecía indiferente, en su chinchorro. pe yai pe shaimaihe tehe a mohoti peritaoma.

raptando. shaimaihe.

to scratch oneself with the nails, generally to remove the red spots caused by gnat bites. tisikio.

to scratch with the nails, generally to remove the red spots caused by the bites of gnats. tisika.

round. eto redondo.

round. eto.

to have beaten someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikirarei.

to have big eyes. wayahorowe.

to coil, to curl up, to bend over. torayou.

accumulations, gatherings. shimosiones.

to receive a piece of game meat. pakekeapei.

I have slippery hands and everything slips out of them all the time (= my hands are so slippery that I can't hold onto it). ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

he lowered the turtle (sliding it down along its support) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to become weak and fall. yohoprou.

there was a landslide and everyone fell rolling down. mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururayoma.

to slide, to roll down a slope. nihoro.

Helicops angulatus (Colubridae). Small venomous snake that is often found in water. Its bites are not fatal, but can cause the loss of a finger.. angukopeheprou.

your legs are covered in veins. wa mãtha mãthoyãh i p i.

vein, artery; nerve. mãthoyãh.

to smooth, to homogenize. kopehe.

apúrense a bajar. pe ithoai ta haitaru.

estira un momento el brazo. poko ta kasheshet a r u.

perfective form of a verb, indicating a completed action. -taru.

the body was heard falling. the tereimoma.

when it falls to the ground unconscious or dead. tereimoma.

tree, Simaruba; Jacaranda copaia (Bignoniaceae). shitipori.

as soon as she arrived she sat in the hammock next to her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

to sit in a hammock. tipe.

they are people from the Mahekoto community, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to belong to the same community; to be of the same species or class. shiroo.

walk in line (and silently), like beans. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to walk in a long line (silently). prihãã.

Apparition stopped near him. poreawe ke a wãri re upratareyoruuwei (mit.

he/she/it stopped near him/her/it. upratareyoruuwei.

take the child to (his/her mother), he/she is afraid. ihiru a ta komakutu, a kirii.

to take (the child) to (his/her mother). komakutu.

is it not the one who lives at the foot of Mount Mãroha, the one who killed my relative. kihi mãroha siki pepi ha, ei a re peripe, ihi a ma kuini, ipa wa naki tea perei ma ta kuhawe.

below, under, underneath. pepiprawe.

to mourn, to grieve for the dead. ohotamo.

I speak. opoporema ãhu.

I. ãhu.

mira los tucanes rojo sangre (de los hekura) batir las alas en el sitio. a no ta tare, mayepi ke ki iye re pahehope ye.

batir las alas. pahehope.

to have hair growing back after a tonsure. yootho.

not to make foot in. yarorotou.

la piel de la serpiente karahiri es ancha. karahiri siki pata re praukupe ye.

ser vasto, extenso; ser amplio. praukupe.

force someone to give something. kanarei.

he will stay with you. kahe ke iha a kuo heape.

to stay, to remain. heape.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma.

the smile froze on his lips. ayaroma.

the tobacco pouch is on the handle of the stone axe. poo hetho hami pee nahe rukea kure.

to be hooked, to be hung, to be placed in balance on; to be inserted in a cavity. rukea.

As his voice gets closer, I learn what he says to repeat it (ceremonial dialogue). mãu e yãhã weyei puhio yaro (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

voice, song, word, personal name. yãhã.

I am closing the mapire (tying its edges). yorehi ya si he itutuai.

they flew one behind the other. the yei tutuama.

to close a basket by bringing the opposite edges together and tying them; to put two objects in contact by inclining or bending them; to walk in a line one behind the other. tutuai.

to spread, to divulge (news, gossip). t wã hayoãi.

to spread, to divulge (news, gossip). hayoãi.

put your head here. eyeha he ta tototariyo.

present the body to a shaman to be healed. tototariyo.

prop up the mortar quickly with short logs. kihi the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ãsho horotow e n i.

to prop up, to support. paihiai.

look (what happens) there and respond immediately (to what is said about you). mihi a mamo ta hutaru, wa wã haa puhi yopraa ha haiikuni.

to respond immediately. haiiku.

to shell corn. yono moku hushii.

1. To shell, to shuck. 2. Shelled, shucked. hushishi.

community divided into two groups, whose members reside in two dwellings very close to each other. poakao.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

we advanced crouched. tereteremoherim.

lightning, thunderbolt. thãhimi.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to break into small pieces. nakashii.

fwãyumi ayou: sin. fwãyumi ayou: sin. de wayumi h u u. de wayumi h u u.

camping. wayumi.

a type of vine (unidentified plant) whose bitter roots are sometimes eaten cooked over coals. koapi ãshithoku.

vine, climbing plant. shithoku.

he is very happy. rehareha natosiki.

to be happy. natosiki.

the woman will respond favorably to my advances. kamiye ke iha suwe a noshi ihitakei.

to think that a woman will respond favorably to advances. ihitakei.

we constructed our temporary shelters in the place where they had dug the earth to kill a babilla. iwa a re tishinowehei ha yamaki kumou shoapariyo.

to construct a temporary shelter. tishinowehei.

he/she/it arrives. shi komããi.

to arrive, to reach. shiki.

Jaguar took another path and made a long detour. ãyoyo shomi ke yoka ha ira ke a pata ãyoãtaroma.

to make a long detour. ãyoãtaroma.

a long line (in silence). prihãprou.

the bats hang upside down. hewe pe mi wereo.

to hang upside down briefly. weretou.

to be located irregularly, to arrange irregularly. parere.

headdress of the hekura with the appearance of the demon omãyãri, it resembles the rainbow. watoshe omãyãri.

Why did she cry out in pain. anuna rii rããmou kuhe.

to groan, to cry out in pain. rããmou.

to divide into two groups. sherererayou.

to see. hoihoi.

to obtain, take or give two objects or two parts of game (or fish). porakataai.

to fabricate an object with walls too high. okoray.

the fire is slowly going out. koa wake wãnonoãi.

to slowly extinguish, to gradually go out (a fire). wãnonoãi.

(related to . mi yehe.

to have the face painted with two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakiraw.

(what happens) there and respond immediately (to what is said about you). mira (lo que ocurre) allá y responde inmediatamente (a lo que se dice de ti).

immediately (when one is questioned, criticized). haiikuni.

the baby does not let others hold it. ihiru a noshi imão.

he will not agree to send the woman to have sex. suwe a noshi imãrei.

to reject advances from men (for a woman); to not let strangers hold (for a baby). imão.

(upriver speech) Immortal people who live underground, resembling the Yanomami but living on a disc beneath the earth. akrehe.

we will hold each other's arms and shoulders. pehe the pe wãri ha ipiararini peheki hãkimope.

to hold each other. ipiararini.

¿por qué está enojado. weti the ha a hushuo.

enojado. hushuo.

to become pot-bellied, to become big-bellied. makasirayou.

when I was young I used to offer many objects (= I was generous). matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

many. hipei.

Interjection expressing prohibition or negation. shi!.

the ancestors did not take into account (lit. e ki wãri kuu mai, pe yaweremou no motaai.

the ancestors did not take into account (lit.: did not say). e ki wãri kuu mai.

it has become rotten/stinking. hithãrirayou.

he prepares such a quantity of firewood that one would say he is going to cook animals of the hunt. hawe yaro ke pe harii the ãsho pe thaa ha yaipani.

to cook animals of the hunt. yaipani.

to turn yellow (plant). frãrãprou.

to help someone, to help someone during work or combat; to accompany, to help a sick person, a child, an elderly person. payerikei.

to start walking behind the others. nohãprou.

they are swarming. rãtãrãtãprarou.

swarming. rãtãrãtãwe.

to shake an object planted in the ground, to uproot it or to verify if it is firmly embedded. hãwekerei.

watch out. fmihami.

watch out!. fmihami.

shitami. shitawe.

colony of seje palms. haprua mahiki.

may I really drink the broth of their stew. yahe pouki koai ta yaio ke e.

broth. pouki.

to turn one. retakei.

to be soldered one to another (long objects). erekewe.

mother (more affectionate term). napemi.

to become more. koeheãi.

then you have to place several logs on top of each other. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

to lie on top of one another, to be sick and lie on one object, then another. makeke.

they returned to dry land and gathered with us. pe hashirikei, pe warokei.

to disembark one after the other. ashiripraai.

I approached a place where there was a wasp nest, they emerged suddenly from the nest and I started running. ya re ikuowei hami kopina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

a place. ikuowei.

when you are thirsty, you roll a funnel-shaped leaf and thus collect the water from the thread of water that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

funnel-shaped leaf (for putting something inside). oshokoreãkei.

I took away banana shoots (of the kuratha species). kuratha ya si kararu thomiã re ayarekirihe.

I took away banana shoots (of the kuratha species). ayarekirihe.

tuqueque; Thecadactylus rapicauda (Gekkonidae). sheshefari.

the spirit omawe koheriwe took possession of my pei no uhutipi and is chewing (devouring) it. omawe koheriweni ware a no uhutipi ha ipirekirini, ware a no wãi uhuti ta wãshikiãkirire.

a mythical being that possesses a feline head, enormous arms, and is arboreal; it attacks men to devour them. koheriweni.

egg white. nathe.

the chickens eat the shells of their eggs. kakarani nathe si pe wao.

they eat the shells of their eggs. kakarani.

the two small partridges gathered a hardened and deformed caterpillar. pi waini kasha ke a ripi prithothowe re hokepirei.

to become distorted or deformed. prihãprai.

I have to get fishing guaral. ya ki noﬁ yawapi fa tereni.

get. noﬁ.

striped fish, Leporinus fasciatus (Anostomidae). tananomi.

I will paint sinuous lines on the polished part of the lance point. rahaka ya mi eyekeprai.

to be sinuous, winding, meandering. shokeke.

to be satiated (terminative aspect, sense 2). tikrohoprou.

to hold with the hand, to transport an object holding it with the hand. yepi.

Õmawe and Yoawe appeared, and the monos capuchinos got angry. omawe ke kipi ha petariyoni, hoashiri pe hushutariyoma.

appeared. petariyoni.

to dry (something). praiku.

(he) sat with legs spread apart. kumãrãroriweni irariwe ke yakorotou.

to sit with legs spread apart. kumãrãroriweni.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered with longitudinal stripes. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to have longitudinal lines or stripes. shetitoimi.

to have erect and firm breasts. fhãkãmiki shererewe.

the two breasts of the same person. fhãkãmiki.

to decide to descend abruptly from a hammock (after having stayed in it for a long time). wahetou.

to move, to shake (when poorly tied). wahewahemou (habla del sur del Orinoco).

to descend abruptly. waheai.

to peel banana. pehiki yutuho.

to peel. yutuho.

to immobilize a person by holding their arms down against their body (to prevent them from committing an act of violence). yokokoãi.

the rain is heard nearby. maa a hoã titetewe.

to be near. titetewe.

look, brother-in-law, I placed the grains on the ground (on a leaf). pei, shori, fei ke ya mope pakei kuhe.

to place, to put. hokooma.

I'm going to eat my peeled bananas cooked in water. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta wa ke.

Cook peeled bananas in water for me. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta tupa.

small variety of banana. kurathaye.

the cat's breasts are hanging down (it is nursing). mishi pe suhe u ka prayukuwe.

to be stretched down, to be hanging down. prayukuwe.

what is happening to him this time. weti naha pei a wãri kuaai shiroãi.

this time. shiroãi.

to have hostile relations. nowã nape no wãrowe.

intensifier. mante-.

this smells like cassava flour. a ni mihitapisini.

to have the smell of cassava flour. mihitapisini.

the Yanomami disappeared in all places due to measles. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

anywhere, everyone is currently in scarcity. hei tehe pe the pe oheo totihiomopotayou.

to disperse and repeat an event over a distance. mraomopotayoma.

that they incinerate the two women one next to the other, so that I may be afraid. suwe ke wama pe wake wãri oramaparei ha, ya wãri ta kiri.

one next to the other (of people who have lived in adjacent hearths). oramaparei.

(antonym). hiwatu.

to dye or paint yellow, to make something with a yellowish color, to dye something with a yellowish annatto. frãihiprou.

as he was blind, they carried him in a hammock. a huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki ha.

eat, blind one (vocative form). hupewe, a ta iya.

to be blind. hupepi.

desató rápidamente el chinchorro de bejucos (colgado de las ramas de un árbol), lo amarró (para transportarlo), y luego bajó. thoo thoku re kushetareiwei, thoku ha okãprarini a ithorayoma.

desató rápidamente. kushetareiwei.

do not get up from your hammocks, do not go out. pe upraatihe, pe horeotihe.

do not get up, do not go out. upraatihe.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass. wererou.

to have formed a blister on the hand. oma.

when the cambures titiaros are not yet fully ripe, they leave the mouth sticky. tapitapirimi pe shopo ahayewe.

food that leaves the teeth sticky and the mouth slightly greasy. ahayewe.

Bot. Bot. , fern; Dicranopteris pectinata (Pteridophyta). , helecho; Dicranopteris pectinata (Pteridophyta).

fern. moromoro.

he broke his arm by striking it with a stick. naprushini kama poko yahekirema.

out of anger I broke the end of the arrow by striking it. ya ha hushuoni shereka ya yahekikema.

broke (something elongated) by striking it. yahekirema.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take a portion of someone. hakopa.

to have become shaky. hãwekeã.

tree (unidentified). korori hi.

do not be afraid when young people direct arrows with bamboo tips towards you. ihiru pe rahakapi mi re puruhouwei ha, pe kiritihe.

what do I care that you direct your arrows towards me. ke ki mi wãri puruhamai ta pera she (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to converge, to head in the same direction; to have one. puruhuai.

I call him father (= he is a classificatory father for me). kama ke iha ya hiimou.

to call (someone) father, to have a father-child relationship with (someone). lla-.

I remove several strips of bark from the yãri natha bush. yãri ya natha ikekai.

to lift, remove (to see, to grab): to detach a strip of bark by lifting it with the fingers, to open a door slightly to look, to partially lift or uncover an object (to see what it covers), to remove a bunch of cambures by pressing down. ikekeprou.

to have white spots on the body. yoapiai.

to have white spots on the body, probably caused by a fungal infection. yoapiai.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to splash or sprinkle someone or something once. hamishai.

he shot at a bird. miha niyãkini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot at, to fire at. niyãkini.

to prohibit; to tell someone not to participate in a fight or war (said once). wapekeai.

the Waika, down there, kill many cotingas. kihi waika a re perirati, ei a no eimipi re sheorati.

cotinga. sheorati.

to be undisciplined. hoashiprou.

I don. shoeshoemi.

to thicken (a liquid), to become slightly pasty; to soften a little, to become malleable. yãhihãi.

edge (inner or outer) of the foot. mamiki tutaki.

border. tutaki.

to clean or paint several objects white. aushimararei.

he pulled the front part of the canoe onto the shore. kanawa ya ora makeai.

he placed the fire on a dry branch of the apia tree. apia ke hi horepi poko shatiope ha wake makekema.

to place on top of something. makeakei.

the walkway extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

to walk through the forest. yashokou.

to tremble, vibrate superficially (like a gelatinous material when impacted or shaken laterally), to perform a gentle oscillating or vibrating motion (like a spider web trembling in the wind). riiriimou.

when I reached the summit (feeling dizzy) I wondered what I was going to do. kihami ya re heakaai totihio kuhe tehe, weti naha wa ta thawe ya puhi kutaroma.

to rise above, to elevate to the sky. fheaka.

to make someone release what they are holding, to make a thief drop their loot when caught in the act. huhemarei.

the foreigner killed one of ours. nape ke a wãri ishou kuhe.

foreigner. kuhuroma.

he is angry. kashithemi thotho.

to be angry. kashithemi.

to come apart, to become uneven. yokaha.

to separate into two groups. pashihiprou.

it is approaching. the aheo.

to be in the process of approaching. aheo.

when you have a nightmare, the one who makes you have a strange feeling is the spirit of dreams. wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi ahimari.

to feel bad (physically or psychologically), to be without energy, to have a clouded mind; to be abnormally distracted or imprudent. ahiai.

we are not angry. yamaki ã rahumou mai.

to get angry, to become enraged. rahumor.

occasion. casión.

abollarse en varios lugares (perfecto del incoativo, objeto plural). wãukuãkei.

do not gather in large numbers. pe mi shuããtihe.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuããi.

we want to carry in our hands the rock that serves as our dwelling. ye (cha.

to carry something from one slope to another (of a mountain, of a hill). kiriope.

he arrived at a place where there were blue-headed parrots (dispersed in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema.

dispersed (referring to cotorras cabeciazules birds scattered in trees). piyekouwei.

to have fallen asleep. maharishirayou.

to hurry away from a place while moving. piyeta-.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to stay behind, to remain when others leave; to constitute a remainder. heikio.

I'm going to touch your nose with the glans. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

to do it repeatedly with the glans. tiprushirarei.

the Yanomami gathered on a ledge. the poyoyootayope ha yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

they gathered on a ledge/platform. poyoyootayope.

to make war. ohe.

the Yanomami inhaled the hallucinogens. yãnomãmi peni epena a koamahe: los Yãnomãmi inhalaron los alucinógenos.

inhale. inhalar.

as the mother (of his daughter-in-law) kept crying, Toucan's father took pity on her. pe nii e miã he weyaa ha mayepirithawe pe hiini e ã nohi ohote thaarema.

to take pity on, to feel compassion for. thaarei.

he told his two sons to get into the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemaparema.

to tell someone to get into a canoe. tikemaparema.

Brother-in-law, don't make me unhappy, break off a little of your yopo cake for me. shoriwe, yare no preaamatihe, the wai tiiprai mi hetua ta shoaroni.

1. To break off, detach with the fingers a portion of something, take a little of the hallucinogenic yopo by breaking it off [tiikei, perf.: to do this to give; tiipei, perf.: to receive something that has been detached in this way; tiiprai: to start doing this; tiirei, perf.: to do this to take for oneself]. 2. To nibble at the hook (a fish).. tiikei.

the forest is cleared (without bushes, without undergrowth). the urihi noshi takakawe.

to be completely cleared or bare (ground). takakawe.

I hurry to look for my bark hammock. yãri natha siki nape kãi wãri re yekeiwei.

bark of the yãri natha shrub. yãri natha.

even the coati skins, they (the hekura) wear them bloody around their necks. yarushe pei siki ma kui, siki iye rukekepou kupohei (cha.

to be hung, hooked (plural objects). rukeke.

(examples of trees whose bark is usable). fãifãiyomi nathahi, hãho nathahi, iwaiwa nathahi, yãri nathahi.

tree or shrub whose bark is usable. nathahi.

they say that the old man from Horetoi, the one with spotted skin, wants to come and blow dangerous substances at me. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

leaves that are used to make the roof of a dwelling and which, being in distant places, force camping in the forest during their collection. fyãã hena henitiwe.

to go for several days to the forest with a specific purpose; to participate in a prolonged hunt; to collect leaves (to cover a roof); to smoke fish; to attack enemies through magical substances (and travel a journey that lasts several days). henitiiwei.

tábano, pegón (no identificado). popukuye.

to paint something red-light in a specific place; to dye something red-light. momihikei.

as they wanted to protect the women, all the men had mixed with them (in the traveling group). the pe nohi niya hore ha peyeaheni, suwe re pe rii hami wãro re the ki komi re nikererayoheriiwei.

to defend, protect. peyeaheni.

agarró el tubo que guardaba atravesado debajo del techo, y se acercó al lugar donde cantaba (lit. yoroa e re piripouwei a ha tereni, titiri a re miã ikiiwei hami a ukukema.

tubo. oroa.

in the place where we ate many wild yams. kapiromi yama komi hapa re waperei hami.

place. lugar.

to collect tobacco by cutting the petiole with the nails, to offer tobacco collected in that manner to someone. tirikei.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. resheshewe.

to become worn out, to wear out completely. waruhuprou.

to sit in a hammock. tipeai.

to have a runny nose, to have a cold. fishihipiai.

he started unraveling some fibers from the end of his hammock (and said): "Mother-in-law. thoo thoku he kushesheprai ha shoaroni.

to start unraveling, untwisting, or unraveling. kushesheprai.

to obstruct, the fish. ka komãtaai.

to incline or make decline (a celestial body in mythology). kaimakei.

¿están todos bien pintados. omawe kekipini rahaka ãiãmo ke ki tahititiraruhawe.

well painted. kekipini.

tree that has, naturally, many folds. turarawe.

having, naturally, many folds. turara.

The Yanomami arrived at the house carrying the woman on his back. yãnomãmi ke the suwe ha yehireherini a kãi kopema.

He arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to arrive, to reach, to come to (a house, camp, or temporary shelter in the forest). kopei.

the manioc flour is toasted (to make casabe bread). nashi hi rãmamou.

to toast, to roast. rãmamou.

hacer la selva más luminosa. wa noka ha wawearini.

forest. noka.

as he was angry, he was not eating. a ha hushuoni a iyanomi.

angry, enraged. hushuoni.

why is it that people always speak badly of me. weti ke the ha yare wãhã shiro wayoamai.

to speak badly of someone, to criticize someone. wayoamakei.

fruits on the lower part of the trunk (speaking of the pijiguao palm). yakrikirayou.

fruits on the lower part of the trunk (speaking of the pijiguao palm). yakrikirayou.

golpear a alguien con el puño durante una lucha ritual. pariki shei.

palometa morichalera; Myleus schomburgkii (Characidae). parometa.

darkness, gloom. ruweruwe.

to become hardened, deformed by heat. torekeai.

the dwelling of Yotenama had become silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

don't you realize that I remain silent because of the gossip that you keep spreading. wa the kahiki eemou tapraimi ha totihii, wãno ke pe hiriaprai ha.

to be silent, to stop making noise. eemou.

to be angry. ishinomo.

when I (get old) and start to walk badly (lit. pitha ya pe wãri kapai wãritiai tehe ya yahitheriprope tao ya puhi ha kuni.

to damage, deteriorate, ruin. wãritiai.

to raise the eyelid and fold it to look for something irritating the eye. mamo kasi ikekeai.

to raise the eyelid and fold it to look for something irritating the eye. mamo kasi ikeke.

to have peeled (a fruit, bark of a root or tree). tiprokorayou.

the hekura chased them and they disappeared. hekura peni pe ha yashuprariheni pe mrarayoma.

disappear. mrarayoma.

to have painted oneself by rubbing the body with dye. hirikirayou.

the jaguar was dragging the dead woman along the ground while the child was perched on the tree. irani suwe ke a nomawe re shaireheriiwei, ihiru a ma tikeo tehe.

dragging by pulling along the ground. shaireheriiwei.

we approached walking on flat terrain, then we went around a hill. yamaki re yaheripareyoruuwei, ai the tiwaro ha yamaki re kutapareyoruuwei.

we approached walking on flat terrain. yaheripareyoruuwei.

to turn yellow (plant). frããi.

she insulted him. suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma.

to insult, to offend by publicly proclaiming someone. nokaa.

valency. tivo.

to have acquired a bad appearance, to have gotten dirty with mud or covered in ashes. toteshirayou.

the horomato trumpet is in the extension (of the respiratory tract). pei orãmi ha horomato pe he timón.

trumpet, tube. horomato.

the raparimi fruits fall one after another (when ripe). raparimi pe prerei siihehewe.

to fall one after another. prere.

that it be done quickly during the day. the mi wãri harua ta hairiyo she.

quickly. hairiyo.

the water of the flood did not go quickly, it approached slowly. motu ke u hainomi, opisi u owema.

to approach slowly. hainomi.

I already have irritated skin from the heat. ya si fraai re waikipe.

to have irritated skin from being too close to a fire. waikipe.

to cause waves to spread onto the shore. pakayu.

I am crippled with pain. no kiwema.

son, I am crippled with pain, the cold prevents me from standing on my legs. shete ya no wãri kiwema, ya wahati no wãri uprawema.

to be crippled with pain. kiwema.

to make love (said by a man). wãew.

to add ashes quickly to the hallucinogenic yopo. hitihitimai.

to peel off, to remove the outer layer of an object using an instrument. hikekerayou.

to be afraid. friri.

I take beads (I pick a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to pick, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãokei.

to keep placed in that manner. papou.

is not that one who lives at the foot of Mount Mãroha, the one who killed my relative. kihi mãroha siki pepi ha, ei a re peripe, ihi a ma kuini, ipa wa naki tea perei ma ta kuhawe.

mountain. mãroha.

"I'm going to ambush downstream. "kamiye ke ya praokirio e. ", said someone from Karohi. ", karohi theri a kuu.

to ambush, to lie in wait. praokirio.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially carved the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to carve or shape partially around the circumference of a cylindrical or spherical object. eshehemakei.

the one who habitually performs the action indicated by the verbal root (feminine form). -remi.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks (and abandon the camp) while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe (mit.

to push away repeatedly, to reject repeatedly. hirururei.

mis piernas se entumecieron. ya mathaki shi harihirayoma.

to become numb. harihirayou.

to be afraid. mothethe.

to be momentarily in the last position (while walking in a group through the forest). shiokaprao.

to emerge (elongated object). shorokoai.

to attack enemies. karukai.

they danced one after the other and, when they finished, night fell. the pe ha praitaaruni, the pe ha prairini the mi titiray o m a.

we will go towards you dancing (the hekura say to the novice who is being initiated). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye (cha.

to execute the presentation dance during a festival that brings together a community (or several); the guests dance first and then the hosts follow. prairayou.

in his house I hung my hammock obliquely from the lower to the higher part of the roof. kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

to have hung a hammock obliquely with one end tied to a rear post and the other to a front post. hehãkei.

(no translation provided). e naha the kipi kuo.

male, man. wãro.

the scorching breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

to undulate, wave (water surface). fu pakayumou.

to spread, deploy (wind, water). pakayu.

I hang my hammock. ya yapiki yão.

hammock, nest. yapuku.

progressively widened towards the edge (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). eheterayou.

to do it (divide something by pulling in opposite directions with teeth and fingers) in order to give it away. wakokokei.

he had so much sadness that he quickly returned to the region (inhabited by his parents). yetu the urihi aheteai re korãyouwei, puhipuhipeni (mit.

to approach, to come near, to invite someone to live nearby. aheteai.

to become red/reddish (due to sun exposure). wake*.

los pelos del pubis llenos de parásitos de la Mujer-tucán revolotean cerca de mí. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

revolotear, revoloteo. shuririope.

they invented a deadly lanceolate point. thapirema.

the cut of the tree is deep. hi ka mi shoekewe.

to cut deeply (a tree). shoekeprai.

yãri natha shrub. yãri natha hi.

he/she eats and also it can be The word 'iya' in Yanomami means 'to see'. t iyai.

eat, feed, nourish. iya.

you can see that I have broken my arrow, I have repaired it by tying a piece to the end of the shaft. shereka ya ha keprarini ya he tikeparema ma re kui.

to repair a broken arrow by fixing two pieces of cane end to end. tikeparei.

to make a liquid go from a concentrated state to a less concentrated one. rehereamai.

to dilute, to make less concentrated or less thick. reherep.

yo lavo la ropa. iro ya siki yaruu.

to wash, to purify. yaruu.

worn out. rurohowe.

it's fogged up, it's misty. fthe mimou ihirashipi.

cloudy, foggy; to be misty, obscured, fogged up. ihirashipi.

si no preparan un ovillo de algodón no obtendrán una olla grande and also it can be The word 'pata' in Yanomami means '(related word)'. ana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

no. pata.

I don. pehero.

to dry and harden without rotting (a dead log). ãmãrokoãi.

Assisted a sick person by rubbing them (perfective aspect). hurikirei.

the chigüires invited the butterflies to a feast. kayurifanariwe peni hurari pe shoamahe.

invite a group of people (family, community) to share food. kayurifanariwe.

Drink water. kushu ha.

to drink. ushu.

we stood for a long time and night fell. yamaki upratao tehe, the mi ka komãi.

to remain standing for a long time; to be standing for a long time. upratao.

to be smooth locally. frakahaa.

the spirit will take possession of your mouth. poreni wa kahiki terei.

will take possession of. terei.

his/her sibling of the opposite sex had called him/her. pe yaini ke a ha nakaponi.

sibling of the opposite sex. yaini.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

the older ones grabbed axes. prowehewe peni hãyokoma pe teararemahe.

to grow, to get fat, to be of medium or rather large size, a mature man (not yet an elder). prowehe.

to kick. kaisi.

I remained ambushed for a short time, and nevertheless I already whistled calling you. ya remou no wãi tetehetou tehe, hiopehe yetu ke ware horomaihe.

to whistle. horomi.

(funny): to place the feet pointing towards the fire to warm them. fmamisiki yehitao (gracioso).

to place the feet pointing towards the fire to warm them. yehitao.

they wrapped their excrements in leaves and threw them (over the roof). the pe hãro sheyemahe.

they wrapped. sheyemahe.

to have reached the end of a path or stream where it ends abruptly. horokoray.

he doubted climbing. the wãri tuo kuyeapraroma.

to doubt. kuyeaprarou.

even though they walked dispersing in the forest, the beast would find their tracks again. the ki pao reikio ma yaiomopotayouwei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni.

dispersing/scattering in the forest. yaiomopotayouwei.

the one who kept him company in the shikã (the area under the roof at the back of the dwelling). thãrimionowei.

to raise the hand to chest height, with the palms facing up and moving the fingers, to indicate to someone to come. fimiki nakanakamou.

to raise the hand to chest height, with the palms facing up and moving the fingers, to indicate to someone to come. ku.

to see better he climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honeycombs that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi" (mit.

to climb a very tall tree to get one. yapai.

to receive an object in exchange for another. nomihipei.

floated. potakei.

as those who were walking in the lead changed direction again, we slid towards them crouched. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction suddenly. ehetou.

Pl. hopehope heto siki.

thorny plant; Cestrum sp. (Solanaceae); thorny palm (unidentified). hopehope.

I roast a cassava bread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

to roast, to cook in or on a container placed directly on the embers, to cook on a metal plate placed on the embers (usually a cassava bread). rãmi.

I wonder if they will really return to me the value of the goods they constantly take from me. "yare matohipi hore toatii ta sihewe".

to wonder, to ask oneself. toatii.

we advanced a little and (already) the sun is declining. wãisipi yamaki ha ukuikini the misi pata yahatotoaherii.

the sun is declining. yahatotoaherii.

her son-in-law was removing a thorn (from his foot). pe hekamapi misiki e washama.

to remove a thorn or spine using a pointed object. washama.

The black-faced antwren made the Yanomami men laugh by smearing their faces with its droppings. hiyomarithaweni ke a ikãã re totihimareiwei, yãnomãmi the moheki ha shiipimarini.

to cause or make something happen (in a completed or perfective sense for transitive verbs). -mari-.

I carry the whole tapir when I kill it. pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

tapir. tirorotamayoruu.

to sprout from the ground. maturipiai.

listen to me carefully. yimika ta hirãrãparu.

listen to me carefully. hirãrãparu.

towards what direction did they direct their faces. weti hami ke pe mi kuprariyoherii kuhe.

they directed their faces (towards). kuprariyoherii.

I put the plantains to cook under the ashes. siponapoai.

I put the plantains to cook under the ashes. siponapoai.

the survivors fled far away. prahai hami the pe wai shee tokurayoherima.

survivors. tokurayoherima.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm using two crossed poles. hãiki.

to have a furuncle. piai.

to have a furuncle. piai.

to wag the tail (dog). yaweyawemou.

Is it really true. fpeheti thawe.

to be true, to be right. fpeheti.

to join a group of combatants, to come to someone. yeteprou.

in the old times the people of the white-backed arrendajos were the owners of the lighter variety of pijiguaos (another type of bird). ãyãkorãri mope re herasi re auwei mo peni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe.

the arrendajos (a type of bird) of white back. thapomahe.

the alucinógeno ayukuma gives hunger (lit: the alucinogenic ayukuma makes one have hunger). ayukuma peni the pe ohetrabajar.

to have hunger, to be hungry. etener.

to become light, to be lightened. herehe.

he ran to another place, looked, and did not see anything. a rerea ha piyeikuni, miãkini, tapraimi totihiwe.

looked. miãkini.

to have been informed correctly. shariripou.

he/she left the cooking water to evaporate. u wehetimapema.

left the cooking water to evaporate (by negligence). wehetimapema.

to paint or dye something a light red color. momihãi.

nos fuimos del lugar donde habíamos dormido, transportando a un enfermo adentro de un chinchorro colgado de una vara, que dos hombres cargaban. yamaki hokerayoheriiwei, pei yamaki hiki poma.

transportando a un enfermo adentro de un chinchorro colgado de una vara, que dos hombres cargaban. hokerayoheriiwei.

bow that was shortened after being broken. pusutuwe.

to bend, to yield under a load. pashokoai.

to improve, fix, repair; to order, classify. totihitamai.

to have disheveled hair. porukuo.

Tiger snake hunter. Erpiente tigra cazadora.

hunter. cazadora.

I don't understand (or: I don't listen). ya wã hiriaimi.

I'm tired of listening to that. ya wã wahu hiriai mohi.

to receive or communicate; to hear, listen, understand. hiriãi.

(related word). shieye.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to drop significantly before going to kill fish in it. thookorou.

term of kinship. vocati-.

the ancestors metamorphosed and transformed into amahiri. no patapi pe shi ha wãrihoni, amahiri pe rii kuprariyoma.

metamorphosed, transformed. wãrihoni.

arrugar la frente. huko siki riiki.

haber arrugado la frente (perfecto). huko siki riikikei.

arrugar la frente por un breve instante. huko siki riikitou.

arrugar la frente. riiki.

I waited for the paují to land before shooting it with an arrow. paruri ya ha romakini ya niyaprarema.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the váquiros scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

I shot it with an arrow. niyaprarema.

to coil or curl up in a spiral manner. akreterayou.

(the water) becomes turbid. u ushishiprou.

to become turbid or dark green (of water). ushishiprou.

to be potent (hallucinogenic). fwayu mi hute.

potent (hallucinogenic substance). fwayu.

they killed the person whose son lives in another community. ihi re ihirupi hoã wãri perihou ma re kui pe wãri sherema ha tharahei.

to live in another place, to live in another community. fperio.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). makoyopi.

the cunaguaro died there, only its bones remain. kihami ira ke a nomarayou no kureshi, pei ke u pe shiro hiraa kurarei.

jaguar. cunaguaro.

to braid, to interweave fibers. kapirosimai.

we quickly blacken our faces with charcoal and, with our nails, we draw wavy lines on that dyed background. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

charcoal. ishiishi.

to be a little strong (noise), pungent or acrid. nakehe.

just when Lizard reached the top of the scaffold he had built to get to the honey nest, Hairless blew the malefic substance on him. we oi ke a yotoharimai peshekuai tehe, nãroni a horaprarema (mit.

to place a pole between two trees to pass from one to the other; to build a scaffold in a tree whose trunk is too large to climb. yotohari.

the young Yãnomãmi do not know how to follow a trail, they are incapable of approaching (their enemies), they will not know how to approach them. pei yo pe kãi nosi pou taomihe, yãnomãmi ihirutawe the ikuo mai ke the, the prakepramai totihio mai ke the.

to get close to, to approach (usually to attack). prakepramai.

tree species; Otoba parvifolia (Myristicaceae). kooto kohi Bot.

tree species. kooto kohi.

he deceived the others, he told them lies. peeye ke nahe ta yaki, ya rãmi ta hu.

to deceive. ije.

to have stomach cramps. yoote.

he is very thin. rasirasima thotho.

to be very thin. rasirasima.

to bite food. si wakokoai.

to bite food. wakokoai.

this verb is punctual. mau ke u ha pakini the miki.

to massage oneself, to caress oneself, to smooth one. hokoko.

when I was young I used to offer many objects (= I was generous). matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

I used to offer. totihioma.

keep on guard. pe ta moyawepraru.

to be on guard, to be vigilant. moyawepraru.

to clean a gun barrel or tube in that manner. mi ka tiprokoai.

to clean a gun barrel or tube by moving a long stick back and forth. tiprokai.

to employ manaka against a woman to make her sterile, causing her belly to sink in. wãheteãmai.

cooked the casabe early in the morning. fiki rãmãi fenapraoma.

cooked the casabe early in the morning. fenapraoma.

ve de inmediato a buscar mi cola de mono capuchino. wishaye ke teshina ta koãi shoaohoru.

cola de mono capuchino. shoaohoru.

to tie a hammock by tensioning it too much. kashesheai.

to swirl, make whirlpools (water). horahoratou.

to introduce by force. kiririãi.

carry me on your back, I am seriously injured. yare ta yehireheriyo ya wãri waikou totihio ke a kuhe.

to be very sick, to be seriously injured. waikou.

(related to) to kill. niya.

to bite (once or several times, said of snakes). warikirarei.

to host and feed guests. thãmapou.

to clean or paint several objects white. aushirarei.

to divide longitudinally, separate into a V shape. erekãi.

to break the shell of. poshoamou.

he climbed back up and began the last part of his ascent. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

To be or get in the middle of a line of people moving, or in the middle part of a canoe. poushokuo.

it is said that they were accompanied back by the people of Shashanawe. shashanawe theri peni pe ãhã peratayomahe.

they were accompanied back. peratayomahe.

to do a somersault. mohe hotekeprou.

to do somersaults. hotekou.

he put his head between his shoulders for a moment. he pasutou.

to put one. pasutou.

the Yanomami spread out the embers and ashes well in their newly burned field. hãnomãmi ke the pe yahipi niya ha taepoheni piweni, ei ke pe yoka.

to spread out, deploy. hãrãre.

to begin to dry, harden, or smoke something. ãrokiprai.

your hands stink. wa imiki ni feweri.

to stink, to smell bad. eweri.

vacillating, unsure of himself, Pico de lacre transported the fire. yorekitiraweni e wake kãi heheheaprarou kupariyoma.

to move with little security. heheheaprarou.

we took a large quantity of verada stems. shereka yama he pe prewe teararema.

we gathered a large quantity of canes for making arrows. sheraka yama he pe teararema.

a large quantity, a great amount. teararema.

there was nothing more than a single hammock of bejuco, no other occupied the place. tahiapi thoku shiro kuoma, ai ke the hishiki kutaope ha kunomai.

to be loaded with many objects. kutaope.

we sat at the edge of the water. yamaki ropariyoma.

to sit or squat at the edge of the water. ropariyo.

I'm going to get my head shaved by my older brother. ãiwe ke iha ya he mãrokoshipram o u.

to get one. mãrokoshipram.

to close, to become. wãkikiãi.

to paint several transverse lines on oneself. yaprutaprou.

he breaks, he runs over. u pakayumou.

to break, to run over. pakayumo.

to hang a container tilted, to put a container off balance. kareamai.

the yawari (a type of animal) also behave like shamans, they sing and dance like shamans. yawari pe kãi hekuramou.

to behave like a shaman, often under the effect of a hallucinogen; to sing and dance like shamans. hekuramou.

to be totally decorated with crosses. oni yakiraprawe.

to be totally decorated with crosses. yakiraprawe.

a large, dark-colored fish species. oenawe kosi.

a large, dark-colored fish species similar to the . oenawe.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. totihirayouwei.

to speak. prakehe.

it is nothing but a guache fox skin, however its head (upper end) has a nice groove. yarushe pei si ma kui wa si he pata yakatowe ta toprapariyohani.

to divide a rounded object into two equal parts by making a groove or incision on its upper part. yakatoai.

I will slap you. pe si poararei.

to slap, to strike once with the flat side of a machete. poaprai.

to have a parent-child relationship with someone; to address someone using a parent-child kinship term. ihirumou.

"don't look at us. "wamare mitihe. ", they say that (when it rains heavily). ", a kuu tikotihe.

don. mitihe.

to have mastered the art of wayamou, to have mastered the skill of ceremonial dialogue. kareherayou.

(he/she) pecks (fish). noshi ihitaai.

to peck (fish, when one is fishing). hita1.

during the night, the hekura come one by one to shake the hammock rope, they wake you up. titi ha hekura peni thoku thaki pe yomipraaihe, pe the hushuuhe.

out of anger, he put his head between his crossed arms. a hushuoripi mohe pokema.

1. to wake someone up; 2. to attack; 3. to act impulsively out of anger. hushuu.

He lowered the turtle (making it slide down along its body) and said: "Come on, bite my chin. totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to make slide down, to lower (an object by making it slide down along its support). yohotamai.

to be unbalanced and about to fall. porutou.

now my arrows get caught in the lianas, that is what I will say (= now I am old and my arrows get entangled in the lianas. hei tehe pe ki sherekaye hãrokãi, ya kãi kupe.

to get entangled with lianas, to get caught in vegetation; to be attached (figurative sense). hãrokãi.

I accompany the others downriver to the garden. ya ta hu nareokiri sho.

they went to harvest together. nape hii ke iha suwe a mori tokuu nareo tehe.

to accompany, go with others. nareoherii.

stingray. shipari.

foggy, misty, blurred, obscured. hukosi.

to capture, seize, grab very quickly. huwetak.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

to send someone to do something; to authorize someone to take an object (perfective form). shimikei.

I was looking at the bamboo-tipped arrows that were directed against us. ya mamo shatioma, rahaka ke peki re puruhuoperei.

were directed against us. puruhuoperei.

I don't make any noise of a broken branch (I don't make any noise), I just drag myself along. krai.

to move in a certain way, to drag oneself, to happen without apparent reason. yonii.

cacao grain. poforoa.

they climbed (the mountain) and, as they were climbing, Kasima felt dizzy. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a.

implies a linear downward movement (or the reverse), to descend following a straight line, to march in a line, to place oneself at the foot of a tree, etc.. -the-.

null. sharapi.

(before) I caught several times in succession. mi wetete.

to catch several times in succession. wetete.

goats of blood flowed out continuously from the beehive (of the oi species). oi ke a pata iye presheshou ha kuparuni.

to flow out continuously. presheshou.

to become dusty. ekrãpiprou.

Rabipelado se levantó del chinchorro y se dirigió hacia las dos mujeres que lloraban al muerto. suwe re ke kipi puhi re hãkihihou hami nãro a hoketou re shoarayouwei.

dead. hãkihãi.

to wear out a little. rurohoai.

Horonãmi was carrying a tapir on his back, on one side of the tapir he had added a collared peccary, and on the other side he had added a deer. horonãmi shama a yehipoma, kama roroku ha poshe a yetemakema, ai ke a roroku hami preãri a yetemakema.

to add, to affix, to attach. yetemakema.

he gathered worms in a place where rocks rise up. maa ke mape hothothopramope ha kohoromi shipe torarema.

place where rocks rise up. hothothopramope.

messenger. teshomo.

to paint red with annatto, to become red. momihi.

to be partially widened towards the edge. ehetea.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

the plant of the birds of prey occupies a wide surface. koikoimi henaki pata re upraa re yaweterakiri ye (cha.

to become spacious, to widen (a cavity, hollow, interior of an object). yawete.

we came out of the water where the path is, we walked for a while on flat ground, and then we sat down. yo re hashiriawei ha yamaki ha hashiriikini, yamaki he ha yariyaritaikini, yamaki rokei.

we sat down. hashiriikini.

to enroll, to wrap around (inchoative). akareai, inc.

to enroll, to wrap around. akareai.

he took another path. ai ke yo hami a horea mahitakema.

to take another path. mahitakema.

regresa pronto entre nosotros a llorar la muerte de nuestro padre (lit. haye e puhi kãi ohote ta koã haia.

lament, mourning. haia.

I will not separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I will go downstream to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

I will go downstream to build a new house (lit.: I will make the poles of the new dwelling clash with each other). teeteemokiriowe.

I descended the mountain in the place where there were dead, rotting cows. ware pe ni ithãri re hiraowei hami ya mi re weteparekiriowei.

to descend dispersed. weteparekiriowei.

to become narrow. makosiprou.

to cut into several pieces. pakaromai.

cacao bean. anamo.

the tembladores gave me several electric shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador (electric eel). tihekirarei.

she was very skilled at catching fish (funerary lament). prororiyoma ke a pata yaio.

a woman very skilled at catching fish in a collective fishing. prororiyoma.

dripped, trickled, streamed. poyorayou.

(he) climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honey nests that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi".

to climb a very tall tree to get oriented. yapepraai.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

to have the neck extended. katiaprarou.

to suspend cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry them. shinari uku rukekeai.

to suspend cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry them. rukekeai.

"people from upriver came to attack us with deadly substances", they declared. ora theri ke pe okã huma.

to go and throw deadly substances at enemies. fokã.

the little bird broods. kirithami a makea.

to be placed on top of something; to brood (for a bird). makea.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

I will pile up their bodies. yototomakei.

shukukuwe. mamoku*.

the women are over there, go make love with them. m ihami suwe pe huu ha kuti, wa ihirupi thaohe.

to make love (said by a man). thaohe.

the stars do not twinkle. shitikari pe mamoku pata royokoprawe.

not twinkling. royokoprawe.

to satisfy someone, to give a lot of food to a guest. makasi yaheteamai.

the cat of mottled snout. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

spotted, mottled. hayapisi.

to become rough, gritty, granular. erere.

to trace sinuous lines on the jaw and cheeks, starting from the corner of the lips. kahiki tikekekou.

to trace lines. tikeke-.

the hummingbirds perforated the top of the ancestors' skulls and sucked out their brains. poreri ke the he mono ha, teshori peni he tiwehepema, he yoshi pe ukukai shoaoma.

he pierced the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

to reach or hit someone/something repeatedly or for an extended duration. tiweherarei.

he hid his blowgun, which he left placed at the Place-of-the-Woman-Who-Has-Her-Period. makini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma.

the place where the woman who has her period stays. romapoma.

(he) was urinating to put out the fire. wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to put out. ruamani.

to bite food. si wakokoai.

to bite food. wakokoai.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to drop something perpendicularly. nihorotamarei.

to remain for a long time one next to the other. hohãthãtao.

to scream in desperation, to scream in panic. eaimou.

perfective of the inceptive (beginning of an action). suprarayou.

you will take these arrows when you participate in a long hunting trip. wa henimou ha wa ki pope.

go to the place where we have gone hunting and kill tapirs. hei koro ha pemaki ta henimoprei hami, wamaki ha hur oherini, ware ki ta niyaprari.

to participate in a long hunting trip. henimou.

the nutria used to take refuge (= disappear) in a small hole. wãisikiripi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuoprou yaioma.

to become scarce or less abundant. wãisikiripiprou.

the (old) thin woman was curled up in her hammock. poreporeyoma ke te wãri tureketaoma, the wãri puushitaoma.

was thin/skinny. tureketaoma.

it is no doubt because of those constant itchings that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

constant itching. preaturou.

to be curved, sinuous. hipoyewe.

to become a good hunter (person or dog). suhir i n a p r o u: hacerse un buen cazador (persona o perro).

to become a good hunter. suhi.

it is said that the feline died (suddenly) while it was still standing. ira a terekeo shoao tehe a wãhã nomarayom a.

the vines (used for tying) loosen due to the heat of the sun. peripo shni thotho pe terekou.

to crawl, walk crouched. terekai.

to feel headaches after walking a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit: the path has trembled before). pei yo tirikio pario kuhe.

to tremble, vibrate, shake. tiembla.

enrollar una hoja a modo de embudo (para sacar agua o para meter algo adentro). yãã hena oshokoreai.

to roll up, to make a funnel. oshokoreai.

to mimic sexual intercourse by sliding the right index finger between the left thumb and index finger. fimiki hishãhishãmou.

to make love (said by a man), to mimic sexual intercourse. hishãhishãmou.

if he got only one he would stop complaining, he would make as if nothing. kotãope mai, ya mohotuo titihiope.

would make as if nothing. titihiope.

repeat what was heard (often distorting it in a biased way). wãnomou.

palm species (unidentified plant). konopo si: 1.

palm species. konopo si.

to shout when in danger, to call for help. pokomi.

to dye light red. shopohoai.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

the rapasimi fish are full of bones. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

the rahara have very red ears. pei yimikaki wake eparohowe, rahara.

very, much, extremely. parohowe.

not to fear approaching a person to say what one thinks of them, or to challenge them. titeteokei.

as an arrow had inadvertently hit one of his children (during the confrontation), we threatened each other. ãtãri ãhini pe ihirupi a ha hãroprariheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

to inadvertently hit or affect someone/something while aiming at something else, due to clumsiness or bad luck. hãroprariheni.

they placed a platform high up, and climbed onto it (to ambush). isi ha kana ãki ha thapikini a nohi tikepopima.

small platform made of parallel sticks tied with transverse sticks, fixed to a tree for hunters to ambush certain animals. tikepopima.

to keep the head extended for a moment. hiyãhãprao.

to bend, to twist. parokoai.

they made us flee. yamareki yashurema.

to make flee, to put to flight, to expel from a place, to dislodge; to reject the enemy. yashurema.

the tobacco is getting moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to get moldy. rohorai.

to make thin, to make not thick. hepisiprawe.

to be completely wrinkled, crumpled or creased. rurukuru.

extend the head (to look). hiyãhãkei.

return on one. yapapraai.

I don. mãuhutumi.

to take or obtain something directly, without going through any intermediary. sharirirei.

the pava rajadora was at the top of the tree (and was not visible). mãrãshi a yaokokema.

to be at the top of a tree (an animal being hunted). ushi.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. turekeprou.

I was afraid and startled. yacia de una formas derivadas, modales u otras, caracterizadas por un mismo condicionamiento fonológico.

to be afraid, to be startled. yasuai.

to bend into a curve. ishako.

to be squeezed against other people [h ikinikei, perfective]. hikinio: estar apretado contra otras personas [h ikinikei , perf.

to be squeezed together, to be compressed. ikinikei.

dry cracking sound made by crushing a louse between the nails; any similar sound. pihimou.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while watching the surroundings (when an attack is feared). kohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; in birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. kohesi.

He/she speaks the upstream dialect. Ofra theri.

upstream (speech). ofra.

to be isolated again. yawererayou.

a cultivated plant; Justicia sp. (Acanthaceae), used as a hallucinogen, alone or mixed with other substances. shãri.

you always oppose (our decisions) because you are afraid. wa ha kirini wa wã shiro remotii ma re kui.

always. remotii.

to have a parent-child relationship with someone; to address someone using a parent-child kinship term. ihirumou.

he took banana shoots in different places. kuratha siki a yua re piyekeapotayouwei.

in different places. piyekeapotayouwei.

to become flaccid, to lose rigidity. koamou.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise, notify. yimirãi.

to possess a large number of specific objects. thethemapou.

if visitors arrive in my absence, while I am hunting, do not forget the rules of hospitality, cook cambur compote for them. yaro ya pe taei tehe, hama pe koprou tehe, wamaki puhi mrai mai, tate wama uku tua heapa.

to forget. puhi mraai.

habla de río arriba. nashi.

headdress of the hekura that possesses the clarity of the moon. watoshe peripori.

thanks to the soap, it will certainly become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to become completely white or clean. auprou.

do not inhale the plants of the Yawari, or they will take your pei mi ãmo. hei yawari pe yããpi hena koatihehe, wamaki mi ãmo terehe.

do not inhale. koatihehe.

although it is very far away, get me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. mithari.

I will get a pot in exchange for the arrows. hapokaye ke ya yehiai.

to get a pot in exchange for arrows (lit.: in exchange for arrows I will carry a pot on my back). hapokaye.

I have lost (thrown away) mine. ipa ya hoyarema.

I don't have any of that. ipa a kuami.

mine, it. ipaye.

give fish to my son, the one who is accompanying us. oãsimi pema a re nokamopore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

the one who is accompanying us. nokamopore.

to be angry. ishoroko.

when they sit one after the other, they have to make you sit in the center. the pe roo yehihimou tehe, mi ãmo ha ke wa kãi romapouhe.

to make someone sit in a certain position. romapouhe.

to acquire thickness, density or thickness. supraai.

he repeats the same thing. nohi yairei.

to choose for oneself, to repeat the same thing. yairei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). wãrihito.

the shawakurimi fruits are edible. shawakurimi pe wamou.

edible fruit of the shawakurimi tree. shawakurimi.

to start piercing or making holes (with a pointed object). hiroshoprai.

cerca de mí coloca un chinchorro (= ofréceme un chinchorro). hei pei ya mi thari ha ke ki ta prapraa.

chinchorro (hamaca). prapraa.

to dry and harden without rotting (a dead log). ãmãrokoprou.

if only I could drink fresh water. ya the u ha koarini.

if only there was a stream of water nearby and also it can be The word 'ya' in Yanomami means 'I, me'. pei the u aheteprao ha yairini.

each time I lose my appetite and also it can be The word 'ya' in Yanomami means 'my'. ya iyai mohitou si ihehewe.

he will go behind the dwelling. hei ya shikãpi re rere hami.

if. ya.

Did you remove the leaves covering the tobacco plants when you went to the garden. hikari hami waheki huu tehe pee wahe naheki he karorarema.

to uncover, discover, remove covering. karoakei.

he shot an arrow at a little bird and the arrow got stuck (in the tree branches). kirithami a pehi ha niyakini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot at a target, to aim at a specific location. niyakini.

se diría que las mujeres tienen la costumbre de venir aquí a matar peces. eyeha yuri ke a no wãri shepraai yaimopihe, suwe peni.

to come here. yaimopihe.

twisted, bent at the tip (plural objects). toyekerarei.

when Horonami saw Aparecido, he/she/it kept silent. horonami poreawe ke a ha tararini, a matha re waitariyonowei.

he/she/it kept silent. waitariyonowei.

to want to speak (the southern Orinoco dialect). peshi piri.

to want to do. piri.

(he) urinated on the seeds and then said: "There you go, brother-in-law, I have put them on the ground". mo pe fukeã ha paripraarini: "pei, shori, fei ke ya the pe pakei kuhe".

to urinate (on something, on someone). hukeãi.

to be locally narrow (hole, opening). wãtetou.

tree; Mouriria grandiflora (Melastomataceae). grandiflora.

to incarnate a hekura. hekura fhekuramo u.

to embody or incarnate a hekura (spiritual being). fhekuramo.

to receive an object divided in that manner. hahetipei.

to be floating. taprawe.

to be undisciplined. hoashiprou.

I'm going to mash the seje fruits and dilute the pulp in water. hoko ya mau yaruai.

Brother-in-law, here they purify you (with a liquid). pei ke, shori, wa yaruu ke a kupohei.

to clean the inside of an object, to mash fruit in water. yarurei.

I have a premonition that my stomach will hurt again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

I have a premonition. kokepi.

we arrived at a place where a flat rock surface protruded from the ground, precisely at the moment when the enemies (lit. pei masi prapariyope ha, yaro re pe katitou totihioimape ha, yamaki kupariyo kurei.

flat rock surface. totihioimape.

on the face of the old woman they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. suwe ke the pata mamo kasi wãri oniprai ha yairoheni.

they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. yairoheni.

Mujer-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

he quickly gathered a white stone and threw it at Mujer-picure. kakuruma a ha hoketarini, thomiriyoma a sheyeprarema.

Woman-picure (a name). Mujer-picure.

to have reddish reflections (perfective). waheherayou.

he is afraid. shinaki puriwatowe.

to be afraid. puriwatowe.

he/she/it will reappear here. a petou kooyorupe.

he/she/it will reappear here. kooyorupe.

to split, to bifurcate, to become bifid; to partially split the end of a long object to make it forked. pakaraai.

(speech from upriver). kririri.

The charo macho tree is tall. Wahara hi ã wãro ke.

charo macho tree; Helicostylis tomentosa (Moraceae). wahara hi.

you all have stolen objects. matohi wama pe toreramai kuhe.

to steal, rob. thomi.

stop complaining about not receiving a share. nakimou mai wa wãri ha kuoni.

to complain about not receiving a share in a food distribution, or to complain about not receiving the share one expected to receive. nakimou.

no crean que el culpable no es uno de nosotros (lit. the koo waikiokema ke tao, ya puhi kuma.

to put something in a position or state. taake.

(no clear translation provided). nahitha.

(the branches of) the horoeti trees break easily. horoeti hipe kreyou si ihehewe.

he made the big horoeti tree explode. horoeti hi pata homopramarema.

a type of fragile tree. horoeti.

to go upriver. pariki suhaha.

to hold with the hand, to transport an object holding it with the hand. hohi.

to wait for daybreak (to do something). uhehãmai.

to turn one's back on someone, or to have done so. hemaka reo.

to turn one. hemaka re.

to have a cough. othomipi.

to cause to stagger, to cause to stumble from weakness. yotetamai.

I will eat many again. kahiki yakei ayapoi.

eat a large quantity. pei kaﬁki.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

he crushed the bee cells. hukukaturou.

when felling an apia tree, I crushed the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

to crush something by striking it with a stick (perfective form of the verb). yatikikei.

to divide into several parts. hakaromai.

habla de río arriba. sikrã.

they left (this morning) to hunt. pe rãmi ayou ke a kuroi.

to hunt. heniyo.

but it has been a long time since I ate wapu fruits. yama pe ya ki nohi warei kurei.

a marker of the remote past (more than a day ago) in the epistemic modality; it is obligatorily accompanied by a perfective form. -reherayo-.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

we. osotros.

signal of the giant anteater. rekerimi siki.

giant anteater. rekerimi.

parte exterior del techo, la que da al cielo. fyaa si humapi.

roof, thatch. yaa.

as Bachaco cut down the trees, the corn began to grow by itself. koyeriwe kihami hii re hiki tuyei re kuaanowei, yono mo hai yauai re kuaaowei.

to occur successively (two events), to happen as a consequence of a previous action. kuaanowei.

to paint round spots on the body by rolling a ball of onoto (red pigment) mixed with saliva on the skin. hikiki.

the rapasimi fish are full of thorns. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

spiny; to have thorns stuck in the flesh; to be full of thorns (fish). misikipi.

to remain for a good while under water. ohotao.

to do the same task in different places, or for the same subject to repeat the same task in different places. ayo.

(Deer) shaved (all the meat) from its arm. hayariwe poko siki hoã haikirariyoma.

they piled up the leaves and then swept the floor. yãã pe henape ha yototoamapotuheni, pitha a hoãremahe.

to shave pubic hair. hoãrei.

to crush a soft object with the foot; to step on a dangerous object. karukurei.

to go quickly to help someone. nokatai.

to stain in several places; to set fires in separate places in the conuco. patihiai.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

ice. peni.

to mix, to be mixed. koni.

the jaguar tore off the dog's head with its teeth. irani hiima ke he wahetiprai ha kuparuni (mit.

to extract part of something, to cut off the end of something with the teeth. wahatho.

to break due to an effect. namo yutuu.

to break, to stumble, to be expelled. yutuu.

wayamou, ceremonial dialogue. oithãpari.

the noise the little one was making could be heard: he was really nursing. ihiru ke a wai kruikruimou yaioma.

to produce a noise each time a sip of liquid is swallowed; the sound a baby makes when nursing. kruikruimo.

I passed by their garden. kama pe hikaripi theka hami ya hayuoma.

I passed by. hayuoma.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

having begun to grow a little. preãkãrãyou.

I'm going to get the others, they will cook the pava úquira. ai ya pe koãi, kuremi pe haripehe.

to go get, to bring, to take. koãi.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashiakei.

to have messy or tousled hair. he hurukuo.

we have intentions of attacking them anyway. yama the pe niya shurukai he ha yatiokirini.

to mess up or tousle someone. hurukai.

to be rigid under the effect of an effort. hirarakei.

as soon as I hear that, I immediately put the nock of an arrow (I'll be so furious). hei re pe wãri kutou tehe ya naka tetai re shoarayouwei.

nock of an arrow. tetarei.

to start having a runny nose. hushihipiai.

Õmawe advanced crouching so as not to be seen and quickly found himself close (to the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei (mit.

to do something quickly. tereterekei.

to repair a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakakei.

to begin shaving someone. mãrokoshiprai.

no hacía mucho tiempo que ellos habían sido incinerados. the pe puhi no preo tutoo yaionowei ha.

cuando uno acaba de ser inicia-. wa epenapi koo tutoo tehe, yaro re a ma roo tehe, wa the mitai hayua re perayoheriiwei.

that has just been done or made. yaionowei.

despite everything they went to sit in the water with their legs spread. wãri haa he yatireherayou.

they went to sit in the water with their legs spread. yatireherayou.

plant; Spathiphyllum cannaefolium (Araceae). It grows in water, or in places where the soil is soaked with water.. cannaefolium.

this tail will be cooked, the hair will be burned off. shina the wãri tuope, pei pe mi hamope.

to burn hair/feathers before cooking. hamope.

Horonãmi who was lost found Cachicamo. horonãmi a mohoru ha kuparuni, moro a tararema (mit.

to lose, to misplace. hoya.

(they) made the woman work and grate yuca. mapii re shoatariyouwei.

(they) made (her) work and grate yuca. shoatariyouwei.

as they were numerous they were busy down on the ground. pe the pe mathe ha the pe ohotaa ha yaithoni: thomipi na.

numerous. thethewe.

to place in parallel (next to each other or on top of each other). werere.

we advanced a little and (already) the sun was declining. wãisipi yamaki ha ukuikini the misi pata yahatotoaherii.

to be moving along the ridge of a hill. totoaherii.

to fan the fire (perfective form of the incompletive verb). yahuhukei.

the chicken ran with its wings extended. kakara ihirupi hehewe a rereapraroma.

to extend the wings for a moment. hehehou.

to ask someone to hang their hammock in the lower part of the roof. shikããmai.

como no poseemos escopeta para cazar, te mataré con mis flechas a mi vez. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani.

to kill with arrows. pashia.

on each occasion the ancestors let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

1. Let escape, put to flight (animals, enemies), let a fish escape; allow someone to flee, help someone to flee; run away with a woman [tokuamai: facilitate the escape of many people]. 2. Let die [tokumarei, perf.]. tokumai.

to isolate a young girl during her first menstruation. ithãi.

hair, head hair. hethãnãu.

last vertebra of a bird, which joins with the ilium. koshãrãhepi.

antonym of usutua. yatuku.

The gallineta kept distracting the gaze of the ghosts. hãshimo no porepi pe mamo re yakemarati.

duration at a distance. rati.

acquire a name (name). wahehe.

to become reddish or light red locally (of a fruit). shopokei.

under the effect of anger. fhushuo pe wayu ha.

to provoke someone's anger. fhushuo ka thai.

anger, wrath. fhushuo.

to clean one's teeth with the tongue for a while. aka wamorem a i.

to clean one. wamorem.

the grease gives nausea. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to have nausea, to feel like vomiting. harihiwe.

kinship term. pusiwe.

it did not last long, as soon as the acrid smoke started to be sent (into the hole where he was), the child fell silent (asphyxiated). yetu ihiru the yareo no teteheprou no mai ha, ihiru ke a matha re waitapariyowei.

I will not stay long. ya no teteheaiwe.

to last, to take (a short time), to be prolonged (for a short time). tetehe.

there the Yanomami position themselves on both sides of the herd of white-lipped peccaries and shoot arrows at them. kihami ware ke ki ha yãnoãmi the ki hore shekiamou yakaroai mapei ha.

to straddle, to be astride, to be overflowing on both sides. yakarokei.

morning demons: supernatural beings of the yai the class; they pass at dawn and when they pass again at dusk they are called weyari. harikari: los demonios de la mañana, seres sobrenaturales de la clase yai the; pasan al amanecer y cuando vuelven a pasar al atardecer se llaman weyari.

morning demons, supernatural beings. harikari.

to place oneself in the center when one was not there before, to place oneself for a moment in the center, to place oneself for a moment in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. tharitapei.

to make dry; to protect from rain. wehetimarei.

sparse, thin (plants, hair); said when the tubers of a yam plant are not abundant. mashishipi: poco espeso, ralo (plantas, cabellos); se dice cuando los tubérculos de una planta de ñame son poco abundantes.

sparse, thin. mashishipi.

as the yawari woman has clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to change one. aithaa.

coporo fish. ãrimashirimi.

cheek. ukaremo.

ponlas flexibles, fabrica un chinchorro con una trenza que junte las tiras en el centro y después ofrécemelo. wa e the ki ha uhutitiprarini, wa e the ki peushoku ha tiyeprarini, e the ki ta prapari.

fabrica un chinchorro con una trenza que junte las tiras en el centro. tiyeprarini.

they were damaged/deteriorated/ruined (perfective aspect). wãritirayoma.

They fled when the jaguar appeared. ari huyeron cuando apareció el jaguar.

they fled. ari.

to stick out the tongue. aka waeo.

to stick out the tongue. wae-.

to bend, to twist. paroko.

they removed the perforated body of the man (= they removed from the belly of the monster rahara the body of the man perforated with spears). yãnomãmi ke the tirosha no ukeremahe.

they removed the perforated body. ukeremahe.

to nibble, to chew. wenikiai.

come honey. puu upe ta wari.

come. wari.

the son of Õmawe lives in my chest. omawe ihirupi ha periparuni.

lives in my chest. periparuni.

to dye red, to make something red. hoko.

to go from one side to the other. hatahatamou.

to go from one side to the other. hatahatamo.

the dangerous bamboo that is found on Mount Rua. kihi rua koku pariki ha ei ki re hoomorãti.

to be dangerous (a bamboo point, only during a ceremonial dialogue). hoomou.

shotgun, rifle (lit.: the wood with thunder). tãimi.

where a dry stream flows into the river, we set up camp. hei u re hãshio no no pape ha, yo re ithot a i.

dry. hãshio.

to salt a food that is cooking on the fire. mositipei.

he didn't show it to the others, he hid it. a tapramanomihe, ai pe rii ha, a ithepomahe.

show, point out, teach. tapramai.

to launch an object so that it glides. reramarei.

I'm going to break firewood by kicking it. koã ya ãsho kahekirarei.

I stepped on a snake (the middle part of its body). oru ya ki mi re kahekiprareiwei.

to break intentionally a long and rigid object by stepping on it. kahekii.

the effect of the malefic substance still greatly disturbs me. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

1. To fill completely, to fill to the brim. 2. To be greatly affected by the action of a magical substance. raho.

when you are thirsty, you roll a leaf into a cone shape and thus collect the water from the trickle that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. oshokoremai.

the rain is heard close by here. maa a hoã titetewe.

to be close, to be near. titetea.

the tábanos have the sucking beak flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tataha.

the thunder roars in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to be always quarreling. frãrãrãmorãyou.

—Cuñado, ¿de verdad eres tú. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe.

you. —shoriwe.

Woman-picure stopped abruptly. ke a hothoprakekirioma.

she stopped abruptly. hothoprakekirioma.

blanket. koiha.

at the moment when the jaguar was about to jump, he hit it with all his might. ira a mori niyão tehe ikãri a shei shoaoma.

when the fire is burning well, you will jump into it, you will roast for a while, and then you will get fat. pe wake pata parao totihio tehe, wa re niyaprapeiwei, iha wa yoriyorimotima, wa prerayou.

to let oneself fall on, to jump on; to jump over something. niyã.

we climbed a small mountain and then changed slopes. hehu a wai hami yamaki ha yãmothoni, yamaki mi rakipariyoma.

to pass from one slope to another when on a hill or mountain; to turn over, change sides, turn one. rakiai.

we will accompany. re perapraaiwei: acompañaremos.

we will accompany. acompañaremos.

the palm spathe opened (releasing the flowers). rasha ãthe homoprariyoma.

the swollen belly of the woman tore open. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou kukema (mit.

to split or tear lengthwise. homopraruni.

¿Los otros ya se les unieron. —ai pe warokeyoruu kuhe.

su hermano mayor todavía está con la gente de Wanapiwei. pe ãiwepi wanapiwei theri hami a no shoaa.

to be absent, to be missing. —ai.

other times the váquiros came in search of them. ware ke kini a nape prakea ha koruheni (mit.

came in search of. koruheni.

(habla de río arriba.). shipeke.

the carrying strap stretches downwards. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downwards, to become distended downwards (due to weight or force). prakukai.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lagarto was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei.

when Lagarto was moving along the trunk. wãritipeheriiwei.

to feel quite well. puhi totihitatou.

to feel well (physically or mentally); to rejoice. totihitou.

his mother-in-law hurried to go get thin rods for the roof shelter. pe yesini hurohuro e ki kea roparema.

mother-in-law. yesini.

I had the intention to participate in a war expedition, that's why I returned home. ya niya ha wayu funi ya koo kuprerei.

expedition. funi.

curare (a poisonous plant extract). mamokori.

(He) climbs the hill. horãma ke yãmoo.

to climb, to ascend. yãmo.

you have to tell the truth. wa kãi rii ha pehetitaruni.

you have to tell the truth. pehetitaruni.

the arrow broke when hitting (something). shereka a yahecuprou shoarayoma.

to break when falling, or as a consequence of a shock (an elongated object). yahekiprou.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to divide, separate into parts. shereke.

to cause suffering. ninimarei.

the people of the cunaguaros acostumbra acurrucarse al pie de los arbustos ãtãri. ãtãri ke hipe koro hami yaori pe yererou re hearakiri ye.

to crouch, to squat. yaori.

speech of upriver people. hawaro.

I will not allow you to take shoots from my banana plants. Yo no permitiré que saquen retoños de mis plátanos.

to be unstable, to wobble, to move or roll underfoot. kapuru.

you will remember this. wa puhi hatukeope.

you will remember. hatukekei.

(he/she/it) got stuck on the bottom. shi wãripariyo.

to get stuck or caught on the bottom (usually referring to a fishing hook). wãripariyo.

don't think you can hold me immobile by grabbing me around the waist. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to hold someone immobile by grabbing them around the waist. fãrokopouwe.

that's what your deer wanted to tell you. ei naha hayahe ke a niya kuma.

deer. hayahe.

1. paruri hesikaki yãpou.

Neck and crest skin of the paují bird; bracelet made from them. fipã.

when the fire (of the disease demons) falls like rain on the ground, it is as if a succession of waves break. the ki wake sharirou tehe, hawe pe u sheyepraaihe re urekupraowei (cha.

to crash (of water). ureku.

(speaks of upriver). tokre.

I fished at a place where there was a strip of sand parallel to the shore. mrakatahu a werereope ha yuri ya pe kããma.

to be arranged in parallel, a strip of sand arranged parallel to the shore. wererewe.

you sleep while they make love with your wife. mio hearewe wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe (mit.

to make love. hiripraihe.

to be dizzy. yoriyorimo.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

to borrow, lend. mahi.

listen, inform yourself, prick up your ears (lit. yimika ta thaparu, yimika ta utuparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : for the ear). ).

to listen in order to know, to inform oneself. yimika tha.

we are clogging the house. yãno yama ka komããi.

to belch, to clog. ka komããmãi.

we are so many that you will get tired of opening trunks to harvest us (say the Honeys). yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope (mit.

1. To open a hollow object to access the interior: to open a trunk to harvest honey or reach an animal that takes refuge inside, to open the shell of yuvías, to break a bone with marrow, etc. 2. To cut an animal into pieces. pasheai.

to bend, to curve, to twist. toyeke.

the dog was small, not big. wãisipi a wai hiima kuoma, prewe mai.

to diminish, become smaller, narrow. wãisipiprou.

él apoyó el palmito de la palma yagua a lo largo del árbol. hii ke hi ha yei ke ãmo hiririmakema.

mantener un objeto apoyado. hiriripou.

él puso el agua y se alisó con ella los cabellos. wãri hokokooma.

acariciar, frotar las flechas pertenecientes a un hombre que ha perdido su habilidad para cazar, con el fin de que la recupere (cha. fshereka hokokai.

to smooth, caress, massage, rub (hair, fur, arrows). hokokorei.

To drag or pull an object along the ground. shaimapou.

when the belly of the woman exploded, the pieces flew away. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to explode, burst. homoprou.

ant. ninipe.

they found the jaguar dead, it was swollen and lying on its back. ira a nomawe tararemahe, a pata shuweturoma, a mi pata rekekepraoma.

to be lying on one. rekekeprao.

to have been satiated (perfective of the inchoative). poteherayou.

to become stiff or rigid due to effort (perfective form of the inceptive verb). hirararayou.

deceased mother. shatipariyo.

to desatize. fkoa wake rãikipei, perf.

to desatize. rãikipei.

to close one eye. ãsitou.

several small warts. simopirayou.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãprekerayou.

he untied his hammock again and hung it somewhere else. kihami peki hirihiã ha koikuni.

to fix a loose tie between two points; to hang a hammock. fririhiãi.

to strangle. forãmi hiyãi.

to feel a tickle in the throat when having a cold. forãmi shi horerewe.

skin of the neck. orãmi si.

throat, neck. forãmi.

bifurcation of a small path. fyo reikia.

bifurcation of a small path, path that leads into a larger path. reikia.

tree; Pouteria sp. (Sapotaceae). makararo.

beetle larva. purima hiki.

due to them not wanting to desist, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to desist, to give up. tirataai.

to fluidify, make less dense (durative, plural object). hereshimai.

your nostrils will exhale a pleasant smell again. wa hiyokaki ni kreteri hirakaa ha totihiparuni.

to insert a flexible fiber into the nose to force a sneeze. hiyokaki hishão.

to have the nostrils blocked. hiyokaki komi.

nostrils. hiyokaki.

the rock started moving slowly towards the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki rakiariyoma (mit.

while we were sitting, the sun moved slowly to this place in the sky. heyeha mothoka wai kuariyo iha re yamaki roo heai shoao t e h e.

to put slowly into motion, to start moving slowly. rakiariyoma.

leaves that hang from the tip of their petioles. mahanishi.

to loosen the string of a bow. prehumakei.

where is my axe. weti hami pooye koshi.

axe. koshi.

the red-billed bird (lit. yorekitirami husi re wakewei.

those ripe (red) bananas, give them to me to eat. mihi wake the ki re kui.

red. wakewei.

to close one eye halfway. mamoka wãtetetou.

to close one eye halfway. wãtetetou.

they fabricated totumas because they intended to consume pijiguaos softened in water on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

they fabricated totumas (containers) to consume pijiguaos (fruits) softened in water on the way. kopemamahe.

null. wayupuhurami.

while carrying the rock, he was listening and staying on the lookout. maa ma yehiporani, yimika taataroma.

we went down the slope rolling with arrows in hand. shereka yama pe porani yamaki nihoropraakirioma.

he lay in a cotton hammock and looked around. yii ke ki ha a perirani the pe mii piyekou.

indicates that two actions or events occur jointly; can often be translated as . yehiporani.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokerayou.

to be about to have oneself painted with crossed lines on the body. yãhiripramorãyou.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, pulling the body and taking momentum from the lumbar region to rise up. pushukupushukumou.

during the night the inflorescence of the manaka palm will bend downwards. titi ha manaka ãthe mi wereprariyo.

downstream, downriver. wereprou.

my wife, with whom I make love. ahe.

1. To get caught or tangled when falling (tree), to get entangled (with another tree). 2. To descend abruptly from a hammock. waheheprou.

to spit out of disgust. fkahu upe sirimou.

to spit out of disgust. sirimou.

to start following at the back. shiokatou.

hurry up, throw yourselves into the water. pe ta keo haioparu.

to throw oneself into the water, to jump into the water. haioparu.

hi. wãyuwãyu.

he did not go. a hunomi.

he was not angry. a hushuonomi.

negation of the declarative past. -nomi.

keeping her distance, she parted her hair and looked for lice. noma pe ha taeni, rapa ha e pe hapreshama.

to uncover, discover (that which is hidden or masked); to remove the cotton husk, to part the hair to look for lice; to turn the pages of a book (neologism). apresheai.

to be numb, to have a numb limb. potete.

the cacao trees leaned due to the burning heat. pohoro ke hiki wai teihia ha yaiparuni.

due to the burning heat. yaiparuni.

me ofrecen de nuevo pescado, vienen uno tras otro. yuri pe ha ware a topei koãhe, ware a topei notiatarouhe.

fish. koãhe.

sound produced by a wooden object when it is struck several times at regular intervals. tããmo.

the rocks are covered in moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

mossy, covered in moss. kapurashipi.

I have slippery hands and everything slips out of them. ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

to slide, slip, glide down a slope. yoho.

I lost my senses from the fat of the cajaro. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, my spirit wanders far away. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

to lose one. wãrirayoma.

to see. hoihoi.

Titiri flapped his wings to (make his parasites fall off). titiri pei ke nomapi re yahuhuprouwei.

to flap wings in one place, to flap wings without flying (a bird). yahuhuprou.

to lose visual acuity. moyepiprou.

to pleat (perfective of the inchoative). wãhirayou.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to create discomfort around someone by gathering, or through constant agitation. tishikiprou.

The ãiãmo hena(ki) plant is dried and its leaves are pulverized, then the powder is inhaled, either alone or mixed, as a hallucinogen. ãiãmo hena(ki).

Justicia sp. (Acanthaceae), a cultivated plant. ãiãmo hena(ki).

paint my face red. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint someone. momihiãi.

the big snake was writhing (on the ground). oru keki pata himonemou kukem a.

snake. himonemou.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to crush, to crumble with the fingers. hurukama.

kanareto. canalete.

when the others had left they (two) searched inside the house. e kipi taeo re feapeiwei.

to do something in the absence of others, or after they have left. feapeiwei.

one and the other sat down and ate the fish. ke kipi re rokeiwei, yuri ke ki re wapiarareiwei.

they ate fish. wapiarareiwei.

to be a little dark. komãhã.

errar un blanco varias veces seguidas. simataa.

to cut a stick. simitiai.

we slowly stretched our necks to see. opisi ke yamaki oraki yarehou.

to raise the head, stretch the neck to see over something, raise the chin when walking in deep waters. yareheai.

I will also scratch you repeatedly. pe si hukekea mi hetur a r e i.

to scratch repeatedly. hukekay.

ant. shiãporomi.

he thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

to become thinner, to become finer. ishinapiai.

I caught a fish. Uu a si pe ke wake.

fish, picúa. a si.

spacious, unoccupied (in a dwelling). hikoko.

they will find refuge on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha the pe he ruoyorupe.

refuge. ruoyorupe.

to become completely disheveled (hair). porukou.

to gather standing. shiriki.

to become deep (the night). ithãthãtou.

after having removed the banana shoots, he smoothed the ground (to conceal his theft). kuratha si kararu ha thomireni, e naha re e the tãihiwe thaa ha totihiarini.

smooth. thomireni.

Õmawe squatted near Rahararitawe upon arriving, to initiate a ceremonial dialogue with him. omaweni rahararitawe a himomai kãi roaai shoapeheroma.

to sit or squat with a specific purpose; to spend time visiting friends (who live in the same house). roaai.

"Yes. "awei. ", the little bees did not content themselves with saying that. ", wãri puu nari re pe wai kuu petaonomi.

they did not content themselves with saying that. petaonomi.

we slept during the night and then descended down the mountain (upon waking in the morning). yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descend down a slope. timii.

ve a buscar mi plumón blanco. horoiye ke pe kãi.

plumón blanco. horoiye.

give me a little. manahewe the ta hiyo.

a little, in small quantity. manahewe.

to terminate, to end, to be blunt. koho.

to make war. takaharimi.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had launched spits, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit, to launch a spit. keshe.

to kill many animals during a hunt. yohumou.

the pointed sticks used for scratching during the unokaimou ritual, the hekura lean on them and carry them, red like blood, on their chests. kanapi hi re teaamaiwehei, pei ke pe kanarepi iye yakiraai.

small pointed stick. kanare hi.

whistle by rounding the lips to call someone. husho wã hai.

to whistle. husho.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to create discomfort around someone by gathering, or through constant agitation. tishikiprou.

I imitated the call of the gallineta bird, and it responded immediately. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

responded immediately. nokaprariyo.

to make an object dry. washitiamai.

fear will make me turn my face away. ya kiriri mi huruprarou kukei.

to turn one. rakiprou.

when the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to deform, harden, twist, wrinkle. tosheshe.

blunt. pohotowe.

pasar una mala noche, dormir mal o no dormir en la noche. shi hihirimou.

to have a bad night, to sleep poorly or not sleep at night. hihiri.

bring the meat here, transporting it on your back. yaro a ta yehipoima.

bring, fetch. poima.

some embers spread out on the ground when they fell. wake pata prariroma.

to become extensive, to spread out. praukai.

the people of the red partridges painted themselves with color, and also painted the edges of their eyes and feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

they painted themselves, they applied color to themselves. piyekomahe.

Brother-in-law, I would have come to visit you, but the gossip made me turn back. shori, pe he mori warou re, wãnowãno re ki ha ya humapi rea re kure.

gossip, rumor. wãnowãno.

hermano mayor, realmente la pesca es muy buena. ãi, kurahe yuri ke ki wai ta toaape.

very good. toaape.

broke, crushed (plural objects, perfective aspect). karesheakei.

to worsen (when a sick person is exposed to the sun for too long). siper.

to make a short bamboo arrowhead. pookosiprai.

the woman who breastfed him/her (when he/she was little). a re shatiowei.

the woman who breastfed him/her (when he/she was little). shatiowei.

in the moment when he had his tail pointing to the ground, Ho- itho ronami killed him. pe teshinapi ithãprao tehe horonami a waikai shoaoma (mit.

to place on the ground. Ho-.

your son-in-law. hemamahe.

to cut across, divide transversely, paint or mark with transverse lines. hahatho.

(he/she) untangles it. fyo shi kate.

to untangle, to disentangle. kate-.

hija, valos tú y tu marido a recoger pijiguaos para mí. heãrohe sho rashaye ke ki ta yuapi.

pijiguao (type of palm fruit). yuapi.

buoy. poya.

to dent an object (in one place). wãikãmai.

Yotenama broke the spine of the bigger boys. yotenamani pe re mãrãnãpiwei pe mi kreama.

broke the spine of. yotenamani.

light red (or faded) (upriver speech). we (habla de río arriba.

light red (or faded). we.

it transforms into a chrysalis. si yomou.

to transform into a chrysalis. yomo.

noise produced by the fall of many arrows shot at a target. taitaimou.

to slit the abdomen of an animal (fish or mammal), to empty it. ekoka.

to extinguish completely, to go out (fire). wãnonoprou.

I made him sick far from his home (using a magic plant). fya the totoprai re marayoi.

to make (someone) sick. totoprai.

The wasp hangs its nest from the branches of trees; its sting is very painful. Yaitakarawe nohiriwe pe pe yawake.

wasp (unidentified species). yaitakarawe.

woodpecker. Picidae.

she had put thoru flowers in her earlobes, and she looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

to put something in the earlobe (a stick, feathers, flowers, etc.). huuararei.

I am hungry. ya wãri oﬁ.

to complain of hunger. fohi hi pe ha the pe ohotamomai tehe.

to be hungry. ohotamoro.

the dangerous bamboo that is found on Mount Rua. kihi rua koku pariki ha ei ki re hoomorãti.

to be dangerous (a bamboo point, only during a ceremonial dialogue). hoomou.

when the rain stops falling you set off again. maa a wehekeiwei ha wa kãi kua korãyoherii.

when the rain stops falling. wehekeiwei.

the dog was named Tokorinawe, it was very large. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

very large. totihiweni.

(related word). ami.

to start hollowing out a gourd or squash to make a container. hopokoprai.

to have acquired a bad appearance, to have gotten dirty with mud or covered in ashes. toteshirayou.

he hung his own skin on the end of one of the poles of his shelter. kama e nahi ora ha siki rukeparema.

he hung it on the end of one of the poles of his own shelter. rukeparema.

as the Maiyo mountain disappeared little by little under the water, the Yãnomãmi gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

(the noise was heard) following the ridge. the ã kãi mi totoma.

to disappear for a moment under water; to extend the hand, to have the hand extended (to take, to give); to move along the ridge of a mountain. tototou.

her mother-in-law broke long thin sticks for the roof of the shelter. yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini: su suegra humapi ha moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

roof. hamapoma.

arrow to which the feathering has been tied. shereka he okã no.

to cause to slide and fall (long object, especially arrows). wekeamai.

they burned the dead person today. hei tehe pe pomorayoma.

to burn a dead person. pomorayou.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikãi.

to be angry. pashorayemi.

green (color). riyeriye.

to sway, to swing (object, tree). wekewekemou.

I will tell (the Spider-monkey spirit) to project its hairs on the path of the y a w a r i (to dissuade them from coming). yawari ya pe mãyo he horoaiwe (cha.

Spider spirits. Espíritus-araña.

Caterpillar cocoon. ehererepi.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). huku.

in. kuweta.

this has the smell of a capuchin monkey. the ni kurisipisini.

capuchin monkey. kurisi.

those who knew the region said: "this is the last stream (there is no other)". mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i: "ei re the wai kua waikia kupe".

to be the last, to remain in a surrounding position. ithorokokei.

to fan the fire (perfective form of the incompletive verb). yahuhukei.

you all have to go live in another place. shomi hami ke wamaki ha perihore.

to live in another place. perihore.

I have a desire to chew tobacco. nahe karepou shi toprao.

tobacco. karepou.

a dull buzzing came from the nest of the mosquitoes (supernatural insects). peti naki no yaripi rororomoma (mit.

to buzz, to produce a dull noise (burning fire, wind in the trees, etc.). rororomo.

everyone knows that in all the places I have gone, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco (by planting it in various places). nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma (mit.

to do something in various places. -amapotu.

I am already sleepy. ya maharishi waikiwe.

little one, have you woken up already. pusi, wa maharishi mraa waikirayou.

to have sleepiness, to feel sleepy. fekotoma.

and so you will get fat. o y (así) te volverás gordo.

to get fat. prara.

to tie solidly. hateteai.

al llegar desparramaron por el suelo los paquetes de guabinas. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

to scatter multiple sets of objects. yapikirarei.

the váquiros escaped immediately, making Sherekanawe accompany them. ware ke ki tokua shoarayoma, sherekanawe a rurureherima.

making someone accompany during a journey. rurureherima.

to adhere something to someone. raoprai.

to be completely painted red. shopohowe.

again, he grasped his arrows. shereka ke ki hurihia re koreiwei.

(speaking of upriver) he grasped the headband made of green tobacco (undried), and took it away. the pata nii ashi re furihireheriiwei (mit.

to grasp, to seize, to grip. hurihai.

Give me the hayakoari plant, when I inhale it, when I am under its effect, I will see in the distance the dwelling of the war demons that are always fighting each other. hayakoari ke hena, henaki ta prapari, ihi ke henaki wayu ha ãiãmori pe re niyayope ya pe yãnopi he tharea.

to have a vision or dream while under the effect of hallucinogenic plants. tharea.

they discovered the dead jaguar, it was swollen and lying on its back. ira a nomawe tararemahe, a pata shuweturoma, a mi pata rekekepraoma.

was swollen. shuweturoma.

small bow for a child made from a young shrub or twig. erekema.

to be very fat, to be enormous (jokingly). no weami (+ neg.

to be very fat, to be enormous (jokingly). no weami.

he began to peel the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to begin to remove the outer layer. roshipraruni.

he ran crying and arrived at his house. miã kãi rerea ha yairiherini, kama pe yahipi hami a koprariyoma.

arrived. yairiherini.

to improve the state of a sick person (causative, terminative). wakakapramai.

to locally damage (a fruit). eotoai, inc.

damage. dañar.

who has inclined the palm spathe where my kashuhuri seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yotehamai.

to go. too.

I will go to their houses to get powerful hekuras, and I will direct them towards you (making them spin). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

powerful ones. hekuras.

to scrape, to plane. shorereai.

bullet ant; Paraponera clavata (Hymenoptera: Ponerinea). Venomous ant, its sting is painful and its effects persist for a long time.. shifo.

to have healed, to have grown, to have caused healing (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). hatukerayou.

while constructing the walkway, the young men really made a lot of noise dragging the poles on the ground. pei u ka ha ihiraki ke ki thaihe ha the ki huya tãrãrãmotii yaioma.

to make noise by dragging poles on the ground. tãrãrãmotii.

I'm going to paint sinuous lines on the polished part of the lanceolate point. rahaka ya mi eyekeprai.

to paint a broken or sinuous line on several objects. yekeakei.

bow that lacks rigidity. fhãto nahi prehepi.

soft (certain substances, certain fruits). prehep.

parte exterior del techo, la que da al cielo. fyaa si humapi.

roof, thatch. yaa.

Will they invite me (to kill me treacherously) because they have designated me as a victim. kamiye re ware nowã ha hamareni ware nakapou ma ta sihewe.

to designate as a victim. nowã hamarei.

to turn around for a moment. ãhemitou.

is following the trail of a brave man (to war). warorayoma.

It grows on the water's edge, it is a plant with thick fleshy leaves, of sagittate-ovate shape. Crece a la orilla del agua, es una planta con hojas gruesas carnosas, de forma sagitado-aovadas.

sagittate-ovate. sagitado-aovadas.

to have left something wet. heremararei.

accumulate, sting (insect with stinger). tikamai.

to wrinkle the forehead. huko siki riikiai.

to wrinkle the forehead. riikiai.

to execute a task quickly. puuna.

to become dense, thick. shikoãi.

to blink, to flutter the eyelids. misi mitamitamou.

I have the habit of eating honey. puu ya u pe waaprai tharei.

to eat. wari.

to lighten it. hereheam a i.

to lighten. hereheam.

the lechosa (fruit) begins to be a little ripe in one place. shamakoro wãisipi a shopo patia.

to stain in several places; to set fires in separate places in the conuco (agricultural plot). patihai.

to smoke (in form of smoke). wekeke.

I'm going to the palm grove to make a tapir scream in pain (lit. eteweshi siki hami ya the pata ta hiyohiyomomakiri sho.

to make (an animal) scream in pain. hiyohiyomomakiri.

to put oneself to. argo.

to remain in that way for a moment. waririprao.

to make war. ohe.

banana peel. kuratha sipe.

peel. sipe.

speech of upriver. kuripowe.

constru1 vb. oi wa the wãri ha yu yotohariprarini, a wãri ta poprari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. intr. ).

suffer the effects of a hallucinogen or illness. yotancia.

father-in-law, put your hands in front of you to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front of them (for protection). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put one. rereketou.

to divide, to distribute into several parts. shekeremai.

(southern Orinoco dialect). etete.

sparse, scarce. resheshã.

to make scarce (perfective). resheshãkei.

sparse, scarce. resheshã.

the woman responds easily to the advances of men. suwe a noshi ihite.

to respond easily to the solicitations of men; to let oneself be taken without crying or shouting by people other than one. noshi ihite.

he/she/it enclosed it between his/her/its feet. wareiwei.

Rabipelado got up from the hammock and went towards the two women who were crying over the dead person. suwe re ke kipi puhi re hãkihihou hami nãro a hoketou re shoarayouwei.

to grab by the shoulders (plural subject). hãkihou.

she was going from one side to another and her laughter was always moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

stay still (or else, you'll see what happens). pe he ta reshipro (antífrasis).

to go from one side to another, not to stay still. reshiprope.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long line that extends. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

straight mountain range (without ups and downs). fthe matoto fririhiã.

to stretch out in a line, to hang a hammock, to be taut. fririhio.

in the old times the people of the white-backed arrendajos were the owners of the lighter variety of pijiguaos (another type of bird). ãyãkorãri mope re herasi re auwei mo peni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe.

the arrendajos (a type of bird) of white back. thapomahe.

me acerqué al lugar donde cantaba la gallineta. lehãshimo ya wã ahetemakema.

gallineta (type of bird). lehãshimo.

Apparition felt fear and was startled. pore ke a ha kiriraruni a ãtiprariyoma.

to startle, to be startled. ãtiprou.

to make war (lit. to make love mutually). na wayou.

supernatural being associated with lightning. tãhirawe.

don't stay in the house, you will take strength (it is what is advised to young people to make them go to the forest to look for food or to hunt). yahi ha kuo mai ke, wa rohotheri.

to take strength (child); to become old. rohothorayou.

omawe koheki roared when night fell. omawe koheki pata re rario re weyarakiri (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

mythical being; it has a feline head, huge arms and is arboreal. It attacks men to devour them.. koheriwe.

he set out at daybreak to go hunting. a henaprou ha koroherini, pei yo.

to set out at daybreak. henaprou.

to speak of something else, especially when not wanting to comply with a request. fãro.

to develop these white spots on the body. tyoapiai.

white spots on the body caused by a fungal infection. yoapi.

the ancestors were great shamans and resurrected, do you know them well. pata the pe re hekuramonowei, the pe re horipronowei, wa the pe mi ãhã rakiprou thawe.

they were great shamans and resurrected. hekuramonowei.

Siroromi skinned the man who was screaming in vain from pain. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe (mit.

to scream in pain. miyomiyomo.

tree, plant. uhi.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

it is a fairly thick tree. okotoma ke hi.

young. huya.

he made the turtle slide down (and said): "come on, bite my chin. totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

made the turtle slide down from above. wetipari.

he will catch it in flight. the nokarei.

he/she/it will catch it in flight. nokarei.

fish, chancleta; Agenciosus inermis (Auchenipteridae). warirorewe.

the people of the cunaguaros acostumbra acurrucarse al pie de los arbustos ãtãri. ãtãri ke hipe koro hami yaori pe yererou re hearakiri ye.

to crouch, to squat. yaori.

they live on the other side of the mountain. hehu a yapuru hami pe peria.

to roll over, to roll something cylindrical or round. yapuru.

black jaguar. tururumi mosi.

large black feline (unidentified), probably a black jaguar. tururumi.

to have felled several trees by making a larger tree fall on them. yashokorarei.

his wife was underneath, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

to place an object underneath another, to place at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pehitheakirioma.

to despedazar, lacerar, reducir a trocitos, aplastar bajo un peso, dejar que un alimento se deshaga por exceso de cocción (to shred, lacerate, reduce to pieces, crush under weight, let food fall apart from overcooking). nahihimararei.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

to be completely concealed behind or underneath something. shãhowe.

extend your hands (so that I can give you something). imiki ta poshokoiku.

to extend the hands cupped to receive something. poshokoo.

it was him who held my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to hold something down with pressure from above, to keep something submerged by placing a weight on top of it. patete.

The gamopetalous flower of the ware nahi tree is fragrant and women like to carry it (the baby) on their backs. ipa wãware na ware na: ﬂor gamopétala del árbol ware nahi, es remashi a re rukepiyei ha, yai the kipi ã no re kimuy perfumada y a las mujeres les gusta llevarripiyei e.

to carry (a baby) on one. llevarripiyei.

they went to kill the effigy. no owe ke a re shei herahe.

they confused an otter with a babilla and struck it with the tips of their bows: "it's the effigy of our enemies. proro a ma kui ha, iwa a hore ha puhiheni, a tiwehamahe: "ihi re a no wãri owe e. ", they said. ".

effigy. herahe.

in the places where the waterfalls are high, the multicolored tilingos have beautiful plumage. pora tirewe ke pe hami, hurepari pe horoi totihitawe.

high. tirewe.

It closed. Wãkikiãi here.

to close, to become closed. wãkiki.

my husband. demoheãroye.

my husband. demoheãroye.

give that to the one who is lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

to install or be installed in the lower part of the roof, behind a dwelling or shelter; to hang one. shikão.

he cut two pieces of wood. the hi kipi tihetiprarema.

cut two pieces of wood. tihetiprarema.

slowly Danta passed (from the tree where she was perched) to a yagrumo tree. kahu ke usi ha shama ke a pata opi re piyekeiwei (mit.

the turtle passed quickly (from the ground where it was) to the footbridge (to cross the stream). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass (without descending) from one tree to another. piyekeiwei.

is that machete that you like to carry on your back really yours. miha ahe sipara wa yehipou pea kure e.

her husband had tied together two bunches of pijiguaos and was carrying them on his back. pe heãropi e naha rasha ke ki pata ha parekereni, a yehipoma.

to carry on one. yehipou.

to hang at a low height. tiroroprou.

courage of one who is always ready to defend himself and punish insults. waiteri.

we stopped nearby and launched a clamor. ahete ha yama e ki upratou ha shoaroni, yamaki rariprariyoma.

to launch a collective clamor. rariprou.

ella cocinó las dos gallinetas y las colgó (por encima del fuego). hãshimo e kipi tupoma, e kipi wai ha yaumakini.

gallineta (type of bird). tupoma.

fish, copella. rapasimi.

how abundant the tapir tracks could be. are pe mãyo heherama.

to exaggerate, to boast (about one. feharai.

to make a fire blaze. wamaai.

to have cut in a circular manner, to have removed the damaged part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimonenerei.

Murciélago fue a agarrarse de un algarrobo muy alto. ãro kohi yashokootayope ha heweriwe ke a wãri re sutiketayonowei.

high, elevated. yashokowe.

te meteré (lit. hei motoreriwe a re perire ha pe moithãpari, pe ithãpari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. te Estaré) en el agua donde vive el demonio de los remolinos, allí te pondré. ).

Remolino, torbellino. motoheri.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Toucan was carrying on his back a machete whose blade was shining, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. hãthoikuni.

when the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to become deformed, hardened, twisted, wrinkled. tosheshai.

they are well scattered everywhere. temi the pe hiraprawe.

there is blood scattered in various places (of the forest). iyeiye re pe nohi hirawe kui.

to be scattered, to be gathered (in different places); to live in, to inhabit different places. hirawe.

while Anteater was turning around in circles, the woman was the first to carry out a trade with a given community. shokou hoo tehe, poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriimaprou.

to be the first to carry out a trade or commercial exchange with a given person or community. shomaprou.

when it is cut, it is extremely tough and viscous (the flesh of the disease demon). the ki pata hãnimou yoripi yihitiwe no kirii (cha.

to cut, to split into several pieces. hãnii.

when he had eaten all the bones produced by the cremation, Espíritu-luna crawled along in a crouching position. oshohore ke ki hititiarei yaro, periporiwe ke a pata hãmorimou ha shoaparuni.

all of them climbed, all ascended with difficulty. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

to crawl, drag oneself along the ground, climb with difficulty. hãmorimorayou.

they constructed the path. the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

they constructed the. yaioherimahe.

to have been grated (cassava). hirika no.

Good banana. Wake heãmatimi.

good. heãmatimi.

to produce pots. turere.

the heat of the house has spread out. yahi a heyoshi he re toreparuhe ye.

has spread out, has propagated. toreparuhe.

the Waika people suffered repeatedly all day long (lit. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati (mit. : until becoming nofeweri). ).

to suffer repeatedly. nofeweri.

to rise (level). huyuku.

they disappeared stealthily, their house emptied suddenly. pe re mraa hãthokeheriiwei, pe yahipi prokotariyoma.

to empty quickly, to become empty. prokou.

to make war. ãtãri ãhi.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or carrying a heavy load). fhuu mi thorukuwe.

bent, curved towards the ground; to have a hunched back. thorukuwe.

Due to me giving them a basket of tobacco, they are now chewing it. pee ya nahe komi yorehi ha hipekini, nahe kareai ma ta kurawe.

to chew tobacco by placing it under the lower lip. pee nahe kare.

Scrape it quickly with the machete. siparani wa the ha horerehorereprarini.

to scrape, rub, or clean something using the edge of something (like a knife or machete blade); to clean or scrape something with the folded part of a split vine held between the hands. horereãi.

I am hungry. wã koãma.

to be hungry. koãma.

to name oneself. sipoo.

however we managed to move away. yamaki prahaa he yatirayoherii.

did you move away. wa praharayou kuhe.

to be far. praha.

the pijiguaos are already well ripe. ki wake eãhu waikiwe.

to be a little red, to be a little ripe. fwake.

to let food stick to the wall of a container during cooking. sutimapei.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama (cha.

to open the mouth, to open the snout in a threatening manner (animal), to open the beak, to separate the jaws. shetetou.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

to pass. pasar.

he/she will be found (= they will find him/her). a tarariyo.

will be found. tarariyo.

he returned empty-handed. shiroko a kopema.

he will simply keep the flashlight without batteries by his side in the hammock. rintena the pata shiroko yakapou poope.

to take something without giving anything in return; to be empty (flashlight without batteries); to return empty-handed (from hunting or fishing). rurayorupe.

they went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one they had arrived by (so as not to attract with the noise a wild animal that was pursuing them). the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to exceed (in quantity, in length), to go beyond (a limit), to leave behind. toremai.

to have the smell of excrement. fni shiipiri.

to have the smell of excrement. shiipiri.

to be dizzy. shiweshiwemi.

to sharpen, to make a point (at the end of an elongated object). yimika si fyimo iheheai.

he carefully sharpened the point of the club. himo ke a yimo wai iheheprai totihironi.

sharp edge or point. iheheprai.

we will hold each other by the arms and shoulders. pehe the pe wãri ha ipiararini peheki hãkimope.

to hold someone by the shoulder, to be arm-in-arm with someone. hãkimope.

he took the woman by the arm and made love to her silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to make love. mahitakini.

arch yourself. a mi ta yãpreketaru.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãprekeprou.

The handsome Fox (hoari) wanted to eat honey oi. Zorro guapán (hoari) quiso comer miel oi.

honey. oi.

we have the intention of going towards you dancing (in the indicated way). yamaki niya tirurou re heaimi ye (cha.

to have walked backwards, danced making several steps backwards and others forwards. tirururayou.

kinship term. thathepi.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiapraro.

to hurry, to rush. haii.

please, here we have to start being cautious. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to start taking precautions, to become attentive (when one was previously unconcerned). moyawetou.

he peeled the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to remove the outer layer (of an object). roshikei.

when felling an apia tree, I flattened the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

I flattened the ocumo plants. yatikimaparei.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. kihami ya koketayoma pei maki hami ya peria nareatayoa (mit.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. koketayoma.

to fabricate killing a man with a flat object during a raid. makeheprou.

flower, fruit. weti pei ke wa the ki.

to practice an incision on it. hikoreai.

she gathered the tobacco without hurrying. pee re nahe re hoketaonowei.

to do something without hurry; to do something for a long time. hoketaonowei.

the son of Ter. ta perioprei, ihi ihirupini ware si re poape, ya wãhã thai ta nomihio sho.

to pronounce someone. sipoprai.

Remove the burnt outer layer of the roasted banana. Thãsikiãi wake huu koporoma.

to remove the burnt outer layer by scraping. thãsikiãi.

duerme en un chinchorro mugriento. yii ke ki tepepishi ha a perio.

to become dirty. tepepishiprou.

I went early in the morning to my father's fire to place bamboo tips on my arrows. haye e nahi hami rahakaye ya ki pamai mi ukua henakema.

to place, to put. pa-.

hearth where a deceased person lived. hãto nahi no prea.

place where a collective dwelling used to stand in the past. hãto nahi wãnoka.

dwelling, house. nahi.

the cannibalistic hunger of Jaguar awoke when he ate the placentas of the newborns. ihiru re pe nosikini ira a naiki shurukoma.

cannibalistic hunger. nosikini.

to adjust badly, to put crookedly, to introduce badly, to close imperfectly; to not bury deep enough. hietiamai.

the (bunches of) yahe fruits are low (on the palm trunk). yahatotowe ha the ki yetekea kure.

to hang low, to be near the ground. yaha-.

to keep mixed objects, to keep a remaining mixture of hallucinogens, to wear feather adornments from different birds. koyokopou.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head, with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to put the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekekei.

he went back directly to where he was. a shariria re korãyoherima.

to straighten, to become straight, to go directly towards, to repeat verbatim, to inform correctly. shaririai.

I will invite you. pe nakaaiwe.

to invite. nakaa.

he partied a short stick and put it in the prolongation. horotowe hi ha peprarini the hi tiketamapareobj.

to put in the prolongation. tiketamapareobj.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. matotowe.

when it became completely day many bees started conversing. pe the haruu hititiprou tehe puu nari pe ã pruka re wayorayouwei.

the men stayed chatting (after the women left). wãro pe ã wayou heoma.

I conversed with both. ya kipi ã wayomama.

1. To chat, converse; to say 2. Used metaphorically: to make love with someone. wayou.

you all see, the night demon passes again, since he does not walk fast and I am speaking, give me a gift at dawn. pe haikia : todos vean, el demonio de la noche pasa nuevamente, como él no anda rápido y yo estoy hablando, háganme un regalo de madrugada.

to be all present in a dwelling or camp. koope.

embrace the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoik u.

to embrace, to hug. waporoik.

to become less dense, to become thinner, to clear (low vegetation). noshi takaka.

to become less dense, to become thinner, to clear (low vegetation). takaka-.

The giant Spirit-cachicamo looks at us with the corner of his eye. wakariwe mamo re repotaruhe ye.

to look with the corner of the eye. repotaruhe.

in an instant, Lagarto cut in several pieces the beehive that he let fall, then he slid down quickly along the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to slide down quickly along a tree trunk. sherorai.

he returned to his house. kama ke e shapono hami a koprou shoarayoma.

his. e.

a poisoned dart grazed my neck. pei ya orãmi si ha rifuma maipariyo kuhe.

grazed. maipariyo.

to drag an object through mud or some other more or less liquid material (so that it gets coated with it). tihirumai.

to have the shoulders, neck and chin painted with a uniform layer of dye. f hako r u k e k e o.

to have the shoulders, neck and chin painted uniformly. rukeke.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakarayou.

he had placed the blowgun vertically on a rock and kept it hidden on the Mountain-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. rihu ke a ha tikemakini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma.

to place a long object vertically on top of another, or in extension of the other; to sit on top of; to seat a child on a load in a carrying basket to transport them in that way; to tell someone to position themselves in a canoe. tikepramakei.

when the woman had fled far away, Oso hormiguero stopped being sleepy (= woke up). suwe ke a tokua ma waikirayoheriiwei ha, teperiwe ke a wãri maharishi mrai ha kuparuni.

had fled far away. waikirayoheriiwei.

to be a little firm, to be slightly hard. ﬁhu.

when omãyãri stops I go ahead of him, I go ahead of the thaapraramai. omãyãri ke a ha upraoni ya no mãyo hãii mi ha paoni, ya no mãyo yai thaapraramai (cha.

Supernatural beings associated with the rainbow and epidemics; what characterizes them is bitterness. thaapraramai.

to have both eyelids turned inside out (from playing). mamo kasiki yorereai.

to have both eyelids turned inside out (from playing). yorereai.

observe that rooster, make sure its crest is beautiful. ei kak ara ke a ta mi, ei ke e moiki riyehewe ta mi.

crest or tuft of certain birds. moiki.

word of Ye. kotoma.

go to repeat what you heard. a wãno ta weiku.

Yaowe, big testicles, said: "I will be the first to repeat what I have seen (or heard)". yoawe nathekiwe ke: "kamiye ke ya wã no weo pariotayou".

he/she/it. e.

it had not been said to itself that the fruits were extremely hard and that it was better to give up on them. the prohohowemi ha ya the ha ta tiratai.

1. To be tied with a very tight knot. 2. Hard, tough.. prohohowe.

when you have recovered your strength. wa hihutou hititio tehe.

to recover strength. hihutou.

(related word). makehe.

to reach an excessively ripe state. poshoropiãi.

tree (unidentified). showemi.

we took another, shorter path. ai yo hami yamaki he tiherirayoherii.

we took a shortcut. tiherirayoherii.

they already went hunting. pe wãri rãmi hua waikirayou ke a kuhe.

went. hua.

one of the cries of the shaman. turiturimou.

they just left (one after the other). pe the pe huokei ke a kuhe.

to leave, to depart (one after the other). huokei.

I carry the whole tapir when I kill it. pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

tapir. tirorotamayoruu.

we have surrounded the collective dwelling. shapono yama a he hithorokopema.

to surround, encircle, fence in. hithorokopema.

she woke up and left him (where he was). the wãri hoketariyowei, the wãri takeherii.

the child did not come down and he abandoned him. ihiru a ithonomi, a takeherima (mit.

to abandon someone on the way. takeherii.

I will tie the ends of the leaves of the package to be cooked. ya the hãro he ãtetepei.

to tie, to bind, to fasten. amarro.

Õmawe turned over (and said): "Older brother, don't be angry. omawe e mi ha hatupraruni: "ãiwe, a wãri hushuotihe".

to turn over, to roll over. hatupraruni.

(he/she/it) experienced pleasure. shi totihou.

to experience pleasure. shi totihi.

the celestial hekura that wear the smoke of the rainbow around their necks. hetu ke misi pe pata wake shi omãyãri re harehei (cha.

The arrendajo grabbed her by the twisted cotton thread that she wore around her chest. ãyãkorãriweni shinari re iki re hareponowei ha a huwerema (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to wear around the neck or chest. harekei.

to curve an object, to give it the shape of an arc. payokamai.

to drink. wakaroai.

to squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to extract the juice of a fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held in the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. ãhuhu.

the palm spathe opened (releasing the flowers). rasha ãthe homoprariyoma.

the swollen belly of the woman tore open. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou kukema (mit.

to split or tear lengthwise. homopraruni.

to obtain numerous objects. prukarei.

agarró el tubo que guardaba atravesado debajo del techo, y se acercó al lugar donde cantaba (lit. yoroa e re piripouwei a ha tereni, titiri a re miã ikiiwei hami a ukukema.

tubo. oroa.

brother, here is an excellent palm heart. ãi, yei ke ãmo wai wãnipraa kure.

flesh, interior, substance (as opposed to skin, exterior, appearance); center, middle (of an elongated object); palm heart. fãmo.

to behave aggressively. waitherimorayou.

Bot., plant vine cultivated; Lageneria sp.. hishima.

tú llevarás las presas cazadas, él generalmente está sobrecargado de ellas. yaro ke wa e yehipope pe hishikou ke pe ha tharei.

to live cramped, overcrowded. hishikou.

we fled running. yamaki rereai kuaaherima.

let's flee, older brother. ãiwe, peheki ta rereheri.

to run away, to flee. rererayou.

press your fingers together. imiki ta wikokoiku.

to have the fingers pressed together. wikokowe.

the ancestors who lived in other times (in different places) transformed. perihonowei the peni pe shi wãrihoma.

to transform, metamorphose. wãrihoma.

to begin tracing lines on one. tikekepramou.

to split, divide, separate into parts. shererekãprou.

untie the rope of the boat. kanawa a natha kusheprari.

to untie, to loosen. kusheprari.

to turn around, to turn one's head back. mi yapatou.

to turn around, to turn one. yapatou.

yãkumi re a piyãno a ithão mraai ha totihirarei: the dwellings are disappearing (= the people are dying). yãkumi re a piyãno a ithão mraai ha totihirarei: las viviendas están desapareciendo (= la gente se muere).

dwellings. viviendas.

both are tall and appear (in the sight of others). ke kipi yareheo ha yaioni, the kipi wawetou ha yaironi.

to be tall in stature (a human being). yarehewe.

he stumbled violently. a yutuprakema.

he stumbled violently. yutuprakema.

to obstruct a specific place. paimimakei.

The worked side of the bamboo tip has been polished. rahaka a mi si kopehewe rãmorãyoma haka a mi.

to decorate. rããmo.

be conscious of what you are doing, content yourself with threatening (without acting, out of cowardice). wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

be conscious of what you are doing, content yourself with threatening (without acting, out of cowardice). wararaparuni.

(The example sentence is incomplete, so no translation is provided. mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yeteprai.

to lean abruptly against a vertical surface, to lean quickly against a vertical object (to go unnoticed). yeteprai-.

to sharpen a knife. nana ishuimi nouku.

knife. ishuimi.

to be located at the stern of a canoe to steer it; to take control of a motor vehicle (neol.). koropou.

to dry, to harden, to smoke. whashiti.

the mosquito reye gorged itself with blood. reye a pata makarayoma.

to be stuffed, to be gorged (with food or blood). makarayou.

en el lugar donde hay una fisura en la roca. pei maki pata yashootayope ha.

to stretch (a line). yashoko.

to walk at the back, to be the last one in a group walking through the forest. okao.

antepasado, hekura asociado a. yopena.

I'm going to ask quickly. ya ta wãripraa.

the others observed the ripe cambures and asked "What is it. ai peni tate pe ha tararini, pe wãrima, "weti pei ke the ki rii. ". ".

to ask repeatedly, to keep asking. wãritaai.

they took along the one who lived in this hearth. hei ke yãnopi re kui, a pararureherii kuhe.

they took him/her along. pararureherii.

because I am a turtle eater. totori watimi ya kutaeni.

everyone knows that I am a jaguar killer. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

a graceful twist to statements. -timi.

I have killed. ya ishorayoma.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

mosquitoes bite (lit. ukushi pe ishou.

to kill. ishorayou.

they turned into coatis (in mythology). yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma (mit.

they turned into coatis. yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma.

he has become angry. a hushutariyo ma.

Verbal suffix indicating a change or transition to a new state or activity, often brief or transitory. -tari.

he felt bliss and sat on the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

to feel complete satisfaction or bliss, to be happy. totihitariyoma.

to masturbate (someone). pikukuai.

they live there. tihetiprou.

put yourself in the center. a mi ta thar i p r a r u.

to place oneself in the center when one was not there before, to place oneself for a moment in the center, to place oneself for a moment in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. tharitou.

to do it for oneself. pahetirei.

to make something become dusty. hekrãpiãmai.

the child no longer spoke, he was stiff (dead). ihiru ke a matha re waitapariyowei, ihiru ke a wai kasheshea waikirayouwei ha.

to become rigid; to straighten up (an object). kasheshou.

cassava flour. nashi hiki.

flour, powder. hiki.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonami poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema.

stone axe. poo.

treahumu: to participate in a banquet of that kind. treahumu: participar en un banquete de ese tipo.

to participate in a banquet. treahumu.

tail. shicaudal.

he was the one who exterminated the váquiros. ware, ihini the ki mi re watheanowei.

Hoo had eaten his brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

exterminate, consume totally. wathei.

to mix with people from another community in a lasting way. pashoko.

the sugarcane of the yawari species is found far from here. puu yawari u siki pata upraa he re yathehepe ye.

to be far away, to be at a great distance. yathehea.

later I will show you the corn. waiha, yono ya moku himiaiwe.

I will show you. himiaiwe.

he will get upset. kukei.

to initiate someone as a shaman. hekuraprai.

It is a verbal suffix indicating various grammatical functions such as future tense, perfective aspect, and modality.. -i.

the tree stump is short. hii nanoka manakoroa.

1. To cut a tree as close to the ground as possible, leaving a short stump. 2. To make an arrowhead from bamboo that is too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakoro.

it was a good hunting dog. hiima a nihitaoma.

to be a good hunter (of a person, animal or dog), to have good aim. shemahe.

They will catch termite soldiers by inserting a twig into their nests, they will eat them. oshe wama akaki ha hishãni pe akaki he oape.

Belongs to the taxonomic system of certain animals (lizards and termites) that live in underground galleries. akaki.

to make bristle (fur or feathers of an animal). mãririprawe.

I reached them in the morichal. eteweshi siki hami ya nosi hurikema.

hurry up, you will reach him. ropaaheri wa nosi huriope.

to pursue, to reach. nosi huri.

these ripe fruits are truly tasty. the wai wake wãnihitawe yai.

of good quality, tasty. wãnihitawe.

to make something beautiful, to do something carefully and correctly. koshãpiãi.

to be the first to carry out a trade exchange with a particular person or community. korãyoheriimaprou.

to start walking behind the others. nohãprou.

the hallucinogen seems strong, his face became serious. epena a no wayuopi a mimou puhi tikrohowe.

to put on a serious or angry face. wayuopi.

suddenly he squeezed the beehive and transformed into a beehive. oi ke a ha the ha haporo- harahara taparuhuruni, a oiprariyoma.

to squeeze, press between arms. haporo.

to have the edge folded or rolled up naturally. wapurewe.

they were his wife, his daughter and he, the man. ei pe suwepi ke e, pe thee ke e, ei wãro ke a wãri.

her/his husband. wãhãma.

(myth): Yãmonãmãriwe was beautiful, tall and dark-skinned. u ushishiãushuhuwe yarehewe totihitawe no kirii.

to become slightly dark green (tobacco); a stream of water that becomes turbid or dark green when a living being passes through it. ushishiãushuhuwe.

upriver speech. sheishemi kona.

cicada (unidentified (animal, plant)). sheishemi.

killed (with an arrow), by carelessness, a child from Poriporimapiwei. canzado (con una ﬂecha), por descuido, a un niño de Poriporimapiwei.

killed (with an arrow), by carelessness. canzado.

to crush or flatten something by hitting it with the palm of the hand, to crush an insect in this way. pai.

it is digging, that one who never sees the light of day (the armadillo). ei the wai re tithare a he wai haruu re maore.

to scratch something with a nail. tithekei.

she left the mark of her passage through the corn field. kihami re mo siki yãrãruã thaa re shoareheriiwei.

to leave a mark on the vegetation when passing through it. shoareheriiwei.

they went there to open the tree hollow where there is a yãmonã bee nest (= they went to harvest the honey of the yãmonã bee). yãmonã kiha re ma pe pehi kãi tiyei re kukeiwei.

bee species (unidentified). yãmonã ma.

to warm up food. yotamorayou.

to be afraid. kirii.

to be afraid. kiri.

the house of the h e k ura sways from side to side (while being transported). yahi wa hute pata ta ataataaprarou thare.

to sway from side to side. ataataaprarou.

to clear. noka wãwe.

they were divided, separated, moved away from the others definitively to live elsewhere. shekererariyo.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter on the ground (fruits). yapikirayou.

to keep someone seated in a hammock (usually a child). tipemapou.

they went around the rock wall of the mountain. pei re maki kothe hami the pe ãyorima.

to go around a rock wall or cliff. ãyorima.

he filled the hollow of the tree up to the brim with honey. hii ke hi ka ha puu u pe pata manikamama (mit.

1. To fill up to the brim. 2. To put, arrange, cut to the same size. manikiai.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

the cat. ini.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe transformed. riye wãtetetaruni, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei (mit.

to narrow, to close (cavity, opening). wãteteãi.

to collapse, to fall down. hishishi.

apártate un momento. a ta prahataru.

apártate un momento. prahataru.

the corn cobs are short. yono mope torohewe.

to be a little long; to have an oblong shape. torohewe.

exclamation of pain. asi yai.

exclamation of pain. asi.

they were splashing each other and dunking each other's heads under water. the ki hamishayou ha the ki mohe kaoayoma.

they stayed in the house to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou heama.

to do something reciprocally with each other. niyayou.

to take for oneself, to snatch from someone. hukerei.

to pluck a bird; to burn the fur of an animal before butchering and cooking it. mi fukukuai.

to pluck a bird; to burn the fur of an animal before butchering and cooking it. fukukuai.

to be about to have one. yakekepramou.

to dry (plural objects); to protect from rain. wehetimai.

I got sick from the grease of the cajaro. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not completely in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, I imagine very distant things (lit. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

substance (hallucinogenic, tobacco, food, etc.); to lose one. kaharo.

to act in an interesting way to attract the attention of the opposite sex. huyamou.

to have vertigo regularly. shiwãrihiwe.

you will give birth with pain (lit. wa ihirupi wayuope.

your son will be brave. wayuope.

to start cooling something down. ahiprai.

They walked in a long line, one behind the other, in silence. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihii.

to become hard like leather, to twist, to deform. prithotho.

there is a nest of oi bees in the trunk of a not too thick (young) motua tree. kihi oi ke pe yetea kupiyerei, motua oshetiwe ke hi ha.

young, small, not too thick (referring to a tree trunk). kupiyerei.

they also killed paujíes for their wing feathers (lit. paruri imisi pe kãi niyama.

feathers, especially the long tail feathers used for adornment. ashirimi.

to be muddy locally. kawehea.

I made the cambur compote revolve several times. tate ya uku yakoretaamama.

to make (something) revolve repeatedly. yakoretaamama.

we spent the night eating the remains of the váquiro (accompanying it with plantains). ware yama pe shee re tehitehimou he harutima.

to eat something accompanying it with another food. tehitehimou.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass. werereprou.

Centipede carved Jaguar's feet and gave them shape. kumãrãwe ke ki wãrini, irariwe ke mamiki yakekerarema.

to chip, to whittle, to carve by striking with a sharp tool. yakekekei.

to strain to defecate or fart. wãthemo.

he did not sleep during the night. a shimakamou he haruma.

to not sleep at all during the night, to stay awake all night. shimakamou.

he put it quickly on his shoulder. pei ke hako ha the ruketarema.

he reached the feline on the shoulder. pei hako hami ira a tharema.

to have the shoulders, neck and chin painted with a uniform layer of dye. hako r u k e k e o.

shoulder. ruketarema.

don't look at others while hiding. a mi yeheatihe.

don. yeheatihe.

that has lasted much longer (than expected). the he piyeprariyoma.

it has lasted much longer (than expected). piyeprariyoma.

we were close to the goal when we regrouped on a rocky hill. yamaki ahetou tehe pei maki ha yamaki hirakema.

to group together quickly. hiratakei.

I am closing the mapire (tying its edges). yorehi ya si he itutuai.

to keep a basket closed by tying the opposite edges together. itutupou.

to become twisted. kayareai.

to be crowded (a place). hithokoãi.

ceremonial dialogue. ware.

they (two) put the package of fish to roast on the coals. yuri ke ã hãro re yapipeiwei.

they put the package of fish to roast on the coals. yapipeiwei.

the ashes were not at all recent, they were really cold. yupu the ushi pe no weyahapimi, the ushi pe ahi totihiwe.

your dog (during a wayamu) (lit. fyupuhe ushi kasi re miiwei.

ashes. yupu ushi.

tree species. roromo.

si no preparan un ovillo de algodón no obtendrán una olla grande and also it can be The word 'pata' in Yanomami means '(related word)'. ana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

no. pata.

younger brother, that shaman standing there will rub the arrows, and you will become a good hunter again. prake ha a re u p r aopariyowei, pusi ei ke ki re kui, ke ki re hokokoapareiwei.

he will rub/massage the arrows. hokokoapareiwei.

small freshwater crab. hewashimi.

we began to surround them. yama pe he hãyoprai.

to begin to surround, to start surrounding. hãyopraruni.

Orinoco. nasho.

he has departed. a hurayoherima.

he has departed. hurayoherima.

above that waterfall was where, being a child, I really woke up. ihi a pora feaka ha, the puﬁ moyawea totihirihe.

above, on top of. feaka.

to decrease (the day, nightfall). shinayu.

I will come when the day begins to decrease. the mi shinayuãi tehe ya hupe.

after the sun has set. shinayuprou.

él estaba en guardia y vigilaba los estremecimientos del árbol (lit. the hi tiikou mima.

cortó un palo corto y lo. horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tikemakema.

tree. borhi.

I will hunt at the site where the demons of the water holes live (lit. hawathokori pe re hirape totori ya pe taei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : there where the demons of the water holes live I will go to look for turtles). ).

malignant demons of the yai the class associated with said water holes. hawathokori.

to have removed the surface layer of an object by scraping with the edge of an instrument. shorerekei.

to make known the name of someone or something. fwãhã tapramai.

he wanted to make his name known (and said): "they are nai flowers, nai flowers. pe the pe ãhã wawepramai puﬁo ke yaro: "nai ke pe, nai. ". " (mit.

to make known the name of someone or something. fwãhã.

plant with elongated leaves; Renealmia occidentalis (Zingiberaceae). cocopio.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini (mit.

to bite off a piece of something. wakoko.

it is our house. kamiye peheki nopi.

we are sick. kamiye peheki hariri.

we who will go (he and I). kamiye pehekini pehe a niyaprarema.

we two, us two. pehe-.

I let a picure escape into the vegetation. thomi ya he omarema.

to escape, to disappear into the vegetation. he oai.

de nada vale que me acerque lo más posible al lugar donde canta, no la veo (a la gallineta). the taproimi tharei.

por más que nos quedamos cercando a la gallineta, ella permanece invisible. hei nashomi naha kui, a taproimi (mit.

eso no es visible. the taproimi.

no se ven los hekura, sólo el viento indica su presencia. hekura pe taproimi tharei, watori pe shiro kuaai.

de verdad, no son visibles. pe taproimi yaiwe.

invisible, inencontrable, no estar (estar ausente, no existir), faltar. taproimi.

ellos tienen tubos huecos a lo largo de sus flancos, y una trompa en la prolongación de su garganta. pei orãmi ha horomato pe he tikea.

trompa (trunk). mato.

I saw that they were directing their arrows with bamboo tips towards us. rahaka re pe ki re puhuruoperei.

their arrows with bamboo tips. puhuruoperei.

to crush or flatten something completely with the incisors. washishou.

ithore 2 vb. ithore 2 vb. trans. trans. t ithoreamai, caus. t ithoreamai, caus. : to curve, to bend something. : curvar, doblar una cosa.

to bend. doblar.

it is floury. fthe wamou hashishiwe.

to be completely crumbled or collapsed. hashishiwe.

ay, they (the hekura) were strangling me. ware a orãmi shiã re tikoparirei.

they (the hekura) were strangling me. tikoparirei.

Bushes or branches placed on a roof for the purpose of keeping the leaves that cover it in place.. shikoshikoma.

the daughter of Venado showed her the manaka palms. hayariwe ke theepini manaka siki a himikema.

to show something to someone. himikema.

(he) had left small piles of chewed wood in all the places where (he) had gone. hii ke the hi pe wãri hore wakoka no hiraatarama.

in all the places where (he/she/it) had gone. hiraatarama.

gallineta. fãshimo.

the two shapono are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the Capuchin monkey ancestors were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to have been placed or to have placed oneself one next to the other (low and rounded objects). tipetekei.

to remain lying on belly for a short time. reheprao.

to fit poorly, to insert imperfectly, to close badly. hietikei.

attention. e su raia ta tikothoheri (mit. the voice of them community. ).

attention. tikothoheri.

to attract someone. sukusukumou.

they hurried to shave the old woman's head. patayoma the he shi hariwe hopaheni.

they hurried to shave the old woman. hopaheni.

while his mother-in-law was hurrying to split long thin sticks to place on the roof, he went to get (cutting them with his nails) leaves (to cover the roof). pe yesini hurohuro e ki kea ha ropareni, yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini.

to cut/collect multiple objects with the nails (perfective aspect of the durative verb). tirirarei.

to be on the verge of tears. puhi ikihiãi.

to be on the verge of tears. ikihiãi.

I hit to collect honey tima, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to open a hollow object, to open a hollow trunk. pawehou.

my legs went numb. ya mathaki shi harihirayoma.

my legs went numb. harihirayoma.

to be afraid. ãtiãti.

to place the arms along the body or have them like that. wikokoo.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

to have the eyes turned or blank, to look with anger, to look at someone askance. poruhu.

to truncate, amputate, cut off the tip. hemathaamai.

to be in a hurry. hokehoke.

por poco lo mordió una serpiente. oru kekini pe mori tuyei.

snake. kekini.

to make hang. reikiamai.

colorful crest of certain birds. huko shopapi.

feather. shopa.

The woman was sitting on the ground removing lice from her hair. mrakatahu a kuope ha tiresheai kure.

1. To remove lice stuck to hair by squeezing them with the nails and making them slide slowly; to detach meat fragments from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tiresheakei.

to eviscerate. peheri.

they are surrounding us. pemareki he hãyoprarei ke a kuhahei.

they are surrounding us. hãyoprarei.

they are people of the Mahekoto community who did it, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to belong to the same community, to be of the same species, of the same class. shiroikuni.

we will take fire and pass the time warming ourselves. pemaki wake ha tereni pemaki pomotipe (mit.

to pass the time warming oneself. pomotipe.

object that can be offered. hipemou.

we have eaten cachicamo meat accompanied by plantains. kuratha a ha opo yama yãhi tehiama.

accompanied by, along with. tehiama.

to become a mãrãnãpi (a youth between 10 and 13 years old). mãrãnãpiãi.

don't laugh at me. yare noka ikãi mai.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãma.

to laugh mockingly, to make fun of someone by laughing. ikãmai.

to make a child sick by not respecting sexual prohibitions during breastfeeding. foshe wãriãi.

to make a child sick by not respecting sexual prohibitions during breastfeeding. wãriãi.

she desired to prepare the tobacco in another fire. shomi yãno ha nahe niya ha yaani.

other, different. yaani.

to clean the sole of the foot by rubbing it against something. kakekai.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). tishiko.

the fish split the guaral. yurini matiriawe ãsittha uhetirema.

to break, to split. ãsittha.

they say that the old man from Horetoi (a community), whose skin is spotted with white patches (a skin disease), wants to come and blow magical substances at me. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

to go for several days into the forest with a specific purpose; to participate in a prolonged hunt; to gather leaves (to cover a roof); to smoke fish; to attack enemies through magical substances (and travel a route that lasts several days). henitii.

he was lying on the ground under the roof. shikã ha a praoma.

I remained in ambush for a long time at the edge of the garden plot. hikari theka kasi hami ya pratioma.

to remain lying on the ground for a long time; to remain in ambush for a long time. pratao.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

1. to curl up (animal, dog) 2. to arrange several objects in a circular shape, to arrange leaves around the edge of a basket 3. to be arranged in a circular manner, to form an arc. watho.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). akorei.

The unidentified tree is tall. Mapayawe namohi a mão.

unidentified (animal, plant). namohi.

a young girl who was confined because she had her first period, left her confinement unnoticed. muãihi , utu chacha que estaba encerrada porque había tenido las primeras reglas, salió de su reducto sin ser notada.

young girl who had her first menstrual period. muãihi.

pus, suppuration. poupou.

put/place the head on crossed arms, full of fire ants. mohe ta poiku, kashi ke pe.

out of anger he put/placed his head on his crossed arms. a hushuoripi mohe pokema.

to put/place the head on crossed arms. poiku.

to give a large amount. hothethekei.

he waited for the woman. kama yahi hami suwe ke a no tapoma.

to wait for someone. tapoma.

to soften. cruhããmai.

to go ahead of someone. heturei.

mother-in-law, go get water so I can drink. yape, miha mãu u ta yakea, ya u ta koa.

I go to get water. mãu ya u yakeai.

to go get water (using a container), to fetch water. yakerei.

he will visit. a yahi no hetepraiwe.

he will visit. hetepraiwe.

abollarse en varios lugares (perfecto del incoativo, objeto plural). wãukuãkei.

1. To separate, tearing off with the hand, the breast of a bird. 2. To peel green plantains or bananas with the hand.. kerokeromo.

fish, sardine. Triportheus.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not endure such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to fight. sheyou.

Woman-curare crumbled a piece of her skin and let it fall into the throat of Jaguar's son. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema (mit.

to crumble, pulverize with the fingers, crumble inside the hand (perfective, plural object). hushishirarei.

llevar una piel de ave en el sima lóbulo de cada oreja. siki reikimapou.

lobe of each ear. sima.

the ground is cleared (it was cleaned, raked). pitha a roshi.

cook peeled plantains in water for me. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta tupa.

to be partially deprived of its surface layer. roshiã.

mother-in-law, however my brother-in-law ate all the wapu fruits (while you suppose that they are not ripe yet). yape, shoriweni wapu ke ki nohi waa waikireiwei.

we were still far from the river when my brother-in-law went to fetch water. parawa ke u owetao tehe, shoriweni mãu u hikei hurayoma.

however, nevertheless, but. shoriweni.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to reach the summit, to move along a summit. matoto.

to be partially rolled up in a spiral; to be folded (the edge of an object). yapurerei.

as his hunger for meat was insatiable, Jaguar returned and ate his son. ira pe ihirupi re a waa mi yaparema, naiki oweheproimi.

to recover, to regain consciousness (after taking hallucinogens). yaparema.

he placed the pieces of meat on the smoking rack. ihirãki a ha yaro a makeprai.

to place several objects on something, to place on a tray. makeprai.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved/twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

whose opening is twisted/curved. toyeketaparuni.

there where the Phasmidae insects climbed. mosha re pe pata torereprarope hami.

type of insect of the Phasmidae family. torereprarope.

why are they dancing and having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriãmoãi ta sihewe.

to have fun during a party, to do funny things during the presentation dance. iriãmoãi.

why, then, are you sitting. weti the ha wa rii roa. , it is menstruating women who sit in the house. kanare the pe rii roa hea.

menstruating woman. kanare.

plants. namoku.

when I jumped over a puddle, I landed on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

to jump over a puddle or depression in the ground. yutupraikuni.

he stopped being angry and that's why he renounced taking revenge. a wã rii ha okeheatarani a puhi rii aithaatarouwei a rii ma re kui.

to renounce (a demand, a debt, an aggression). okeheatarani.

to rise momentarily on tiptoe. iteshetou.

to make do or allow to do something in a certain place; to make put something or someone in a certain position. taamake.

it is on the ground, on the river bank. para u kasi hami the praa kupoi.

I am really very thirsty, in what direction is the river. ya amishi totihiwe ma ta yaitani, weti ha parawa ke u ahetea kupe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

river, major watercourse. kupoi.

he turned his head abruptly towards his daughter. pe thee ke iha a mi yapaprakekirioma.

to turn one. yapaprakei.

tomorrow, while you make him play, you will cover him with your excrement. fenaha ke wa ha iriamoni wa wãri shiipimari.

to make someone play, to entertain someone. iriamomai.

he lay in a cotton hammock and looked around. yii ke ki ha a perirani the pe mii piyekou.

while, at the same time that. perirani.

you see well that these machetes have truncated blades (are bad and old). hei sipara pe ma re fematha totihii.

Spirit-toucan flew in turn towards the swinging truncated liana. rasirasi thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepirithawe a yei re notioimi.

truncated, amputated, cut off. hematha.

put yourself. ponte.

(he/she/it) maintained balance in a wavering manner. hehehou kukei.

to maintain balance in a wavering manner. hehehou.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen, to make pointed. yakekea.

to have goosebumps. umokoyoripi.

To be covered in dew. heuheupi.

(he/she/it) thinned the narrower ends (of arrows). ãikiãkei.

to thin the narrower end of the reed before inserting the feathers (of an arrow). ãikiãkei.

the sun is already declining. mothoka kaiwe waikiwe.

to be inclined, to be oblique. kaiprawe.

we will go towards you dancing (say the hekura spirits to the initiate). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye.

to go towards (someone) dancing. heaimi.

I will return (here). ya huu kooimap e.

I shot (an arrow) at the anteater just as it was coming towards me. tepe ha huimai tehe ya niyaprarema.

I go in that direction chasing the little birds. heyemi kirithami ya pe nosi pou kuimati.

here the day comes again. pe the haruu koã a re kuim i.

to go in a direction (upstream or downstream). kooimap.

"those are the enemy warriors who shout to attract us", we said. "wayu peni pemareki hoã pokomaihe", yamaki kuma.

to shout to attract or gather. pokomaihe.

(he/she) speaks from upstream. poa namoﬁ.

upstream. namoﬁ.

syn. sin.

to have the foreskin tied to a cotton thread around the waist (perfective form). mo ãtetekei.

to tie or bind something quickly (perfective form). ãtetekei.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma.

faint noise, barely perceptible. Warakuawe.

your older female relative. amiyehe.

to get wet, to become damp. hereai.

Cook the cassava roots and give them to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to cook, to boil. tupani.

to start cutting down a tree with an axe. pashokoprai.

did he take revenge. the no wãri yurenowe.

indicates that the speaker did not attend the event being spoken about, or did not immediately realize what was happening. yurenowe?.

from the moment she returned to being alone, her mother cried for whole days. yãmi pe nii e kuo tehe e miã he weyahaoma.

to return. yãmi.

to scratch oneself with an object. si hikekeo.

to scratch oneself with an object. hikeke.

the lechosa (fruit) begins to be a little ripe in one spot. shamakoro wãisipi a shopo patia.

to draw a stain; to burn a single spot in the garden. patiai.

son, do not sit with your legs bent. shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai.

son, young male. shetewe.

a red variety of peach palm. wakewakerimi.

to cut several pieces of game meat for others (perfective, plural object). pakekerarei.

to hang (racimos of plantains or cambures) inverted with respect to their usual position. madushokãtama.

to cause to produce pots. turereamai.

to pass rapidly. shãishãiãi.

(speaks of upriver). prerei.

(he/she/it) fell or slipped. t tiikiprou.

to fall or slip. tiiki.

the women went to break by hand thin sticks for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

to break by hand thin sticks for the roof of a temporary shelter. fhurohuroma k r e a i.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. hurohuroma.

they were the first to climb, and many Yanomami climbed after them. pe tua ha pariikutuni, pruka yãnomãmi the pe tuo re hepariyonowei.

to go after, to follow. pariikutuni.

to cover someone. he oromashimoprariyo.

would you have the courage to challenge me, urging me to carry out my threats. kamiye re iha waheki he wãri hore ou thawe. (ceremonial dialogue). (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to challenge a person by urging them to carry out a threat they have made. he ou.

to prepare for war, to prepare for an attack (lit. frahaka hiiãprarai.

to prepare for war, to prepare for an attack. hiiãprarai.

do not be afraid when young people direct their bamboo-tipped arrows towards you. ihiru pe rahakapi mi re puruhouwei ha, pe kiritihe.

what do I care that you direct your arrows towards me. ke ki mi wãri puruhamai ta pera she (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

converge, head in the same direction; have one. puruhu.

they had placed themselves side by side and Macagua was directing them to dig. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to dig. theikei.

mañana trabajaré en los conucos (río abajo). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

río abajo se oyó el ruido de un motor fuera de borda que remontaba. motoro a wã petarekirio, a wã mi yãmokirioma.

mañana por la mañana descenderemos (de la montaña). henaha pemaki yohoo henaokiriope.

downstream, downriver. mikiri.

to bend a finger. fi mihena shãkoãi.

to bend a finger. shãkoã.

to plant tightly. tiai shatitiwe.

to plant tightly or closely together. shatitiwe.

be attentive while walking. a ta moyaweaheri.

to make someone prudent, attentive. moyawemai.

Yotenama begins to suffer the effects of the pepper smoke (myth) and also it can be The word 'praki' in Yanomami means '(related word)'. praki pe wake shini yotenama a teai (mit. It is an Noun. ): Yotenama empieza a sufrir los efectos del humo del ají.

to dry (something). praki.

to break a piece of a round object by striking it. yareshe.

ant. Camponotus.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

to take an object without looking at the person, to have the eyes turned or blank. nohoã.

sole of the foot. mamiki pariki.

heel. mamiki teshina.

foot. mamiki.

before leaving, they arranged a row of palm leaves stuck in the ground. pe the pe humapi reprou tehe, wãima henaki re ithãkeiwehei.

to plant, to insert vertically into the ground, to offer (a basket of food), to descend (from a hammock). ithãkei.

large spider. wariomi kohesi.

pelvis, hip bone. kohesi.

others are ambushed a little farther away. ai the pe rea he piyehetaa.

to be a little higher than, to be a little farther (same inflections as for piye). piyehe.

to possess dried game meat or tobacco. shirikipou.

her older sister, who is there, if only we could live in neighboring houses. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

older female relative. amiyepi.

piapoco or diostedé rabadilla dorada (bird species). nera.

do not get up from your hammocks, do not go out. pe upraatihe, pe horeotihe.

do not get up, do not go out. horeotihe.

when the celestial disk broke, the ancestors ran to take refuge in the cacao trees and also it can be The word 'tu' in Yanomami means 'doctor'. tu misi keprou tehe pohoroa ana hiki upraope ha poreri ke pe re pririkeiwei.

when. tu.

to be pursuing, to be reaching someone. hurioven.

he sharpened the end of his club a lot. himo ora ke a namo thai preyukua.

to sharpen to a point, make pointed (perfective). preyukukei.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. yairaririni.

changing (adolescent); having a hoarse voice (from having shouted too much or after having participated in a ceremonial dialogue). peherããi.

the people upriver wear such narrow loincloths that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

to protrude on both sides. rapoheni.

many paujíes flew away, they were not shy at all. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma, mohoti totih i w e.

to fly away (from the ground). yeoprou.

infested with worms. moshufawe.

I am the only one who has the desire to work. kamiye ya shiro ohote makokoa.

he is a hard worker (or: he has the desire to do it). a ohote.

to work, to be active, to have the desire to do something. ohote.

to pierce, to perforate (continuous). hitosai.

to have been pierced, to have been perforated (resultative). hitosano.

to pierce, to perforate. hitoso.

those who were taking refuge (on the mountain, to escape the flood) brought ocumos close with poles to plant them. pe he re ruonowei peni, pe niya ha tiaheni, ohina pe rekamahe.

to bring close with a pole. rekamahe.

Cascade of Thunder. yãrutha a pora.

mythological tree that is found in the land inhabited by the ancestors in ancient times. yãrutha.

to progressively widen towards the edge (in a conical or bell shape). eheteprou.

she accompanied Toucan to his house. mayepiriwe ke e yahi hami a nokarema.

to accompany. nokakei.

fluid state and also it can be The word 'hereshi' in Yanomami means 'clear'. estado t hereshi.

fluid. hereshi.

to return on one. yapataai.

he makes the noise louder. a wã nakeamai.

to make something more flavorful, spicy or pungent. nakekei.

to shrink, reduce. horotai.

to pleat (locally). wãhiãi.

a little, in small quantity. wãsisipi.

go over there to cook the váquiro. ware a ta tukutuhe.

to cook (something) over there. tukutuhe.

¿por qué renunciaron a querer matarlos. weti ke wa the nape tuo.

why?. tuo?.

he put me next to a thick tree like this, with my arms held against my body (the speaker imitates the gesture), he also made me as small as he could. e naha kuwe the hi ha ya hiririoma, wãisipi yokokowe ya kuoma.

to have the arms held against the body. yokokowe.

to place the hand on one side of the face (when lying in a hammock). fnaki theki huweai.

side (of the face). huweai.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to compress, to place one object on top of another to keep it in place. patetekei.

to keep the bowstring taut at the heel of an arrow (perfective). shereka naka tipetarei.

to keep the bowstring taut at the heel of an arrow. mapou.

everywhere we lack food. kamishi oo yamaki kuomopotayou.

to go through a period of famine, to have nothing to eat. kuomopotayou.

I am the one who will take the funerary gourd to the inhabitants of Wanapiwei. hei wanapiwei theri ha kamiyeni ai ke ya hishima yehipou totihiope.

who are you, who lives on the visible side of Mount Wanapiwei (on the slope facing us). kihi wanapiwei a pariki ha, weti wa wãri ta rora ke.

a place name. wanapiwei.

do not be always grabbing our prey. yamare niipi waiamatihe.

do not be always grabbing our prey. waiamatihe.

I bend upwards. mi yãprekãi.

to bend upwards. yãprekãi.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to get out of a canoe, to set foot on land, to get out of the water. washirio.

come, older brother, make love with her. pei, ãi, kaheni ke na ta waarari.

he made love with the woman and gave her the two gallinetas. suwe e na ha waakini e kipi hãshimo hipekema.

to make love (said by a man). kuwemo.

I wanted to do it with pleasure, but the gossip dissuaded me from doing it. itarte con gusto, pero las habladurías me disuadieron de hacerlo.

I wanted to. itarte.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

to shoot small palm wood arrows (repeatedly or over a duration). tiheherarei.

to have stopped at the entrance of a dwelling. hewea.

to paint dots on someone. tipikiakei.

to tell someone to pretend not to know. wã mohotumomai.

to deny one. mohotumomai.

deep (the interior of an object, a cavity). koehãi.

that Shamathari became a great shaman (= he has many hekura in his chest). ihi a shamathari re kuini pe pariki thãrimipariyo (cha.

to have many hekura (spirits), to be a powerful shaman. thãrimiã.

lie in the hammock, the fish that swim in the water, without any objection, cut for me with their teeth (something to grab them) (= give me fishing line). wa mi ha yaithoni, hei ke ki re shurirorati, wamaki ã hai mai ke ki ta wetiki.

1. To turn one. yaithoo.

to break into two equal parts. wahathoprai.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with yellowish vertical lines. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with yellowish vertical lines. Shãshãripiwei.

knot in the wood. fhi moshoko.

knot. motohe.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long stretched-out line. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

to move forming a stretched-out line. fririhou.

count with your fingers. imiki ta oweiku.

to enumerate, to count using the fingers. owe.

arcabuz (arquebuse, an early type of firearm). arakusa.

they do not cease sharpening the points of their bamboo arrowheads (= they do not cease desiring to go to war). pe the ki no wãri rahaka namo thai mrapimi.

to sharpen. thaai.

I have my mouth in a lamentable state (= I am thirsty). ya kahiki no hore preaai ayaa re totihirayoi.

to lose dignity, to be dishonored, to be in a lamentable state. preaai.

to present one. hãihi.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

to become spacious, to expand (a cavity, a hole, the interior of an object). yaweteai.

they gathered (and after someone said): "let's go, young people, have fun". the pe yototai ha kuparuni.

to gather, to assemble. totoprou.

the hollow trunk of the piyawa tree; its sting is painful. piyawa namo hi.

tree; Triplaris americana (Polygonaceae). piyawa.

to be very bitter. koãmi.

I will cut down the large trees, then clear the undergrowth, and finally burn it all (myth). wa ha kayapamoruni, wa the wake yea fa mahirini, ihi re the ishi ha kuratha wa si tia.

to cut down large trees. kayapamou.

wet guayuco pants irritate the skin of the thighs. wayuko here peni the pe waku misi hushiamai.

to cause a painful irritation of the skin. hushimararei.

to speak with a trembling voice. rahihiwe.

to take out several parts of a whole to offer them to several people. shetekeakei.

they gathered banana plants on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha kuratha si pe hirapraai yaiomahe.

to conserve objects grouped together, to name habitually something or someone in a certain way. hirapou.

he went to look for worms in a place where there were many rocks. maa ke mape hothothomope hami kohoromi shiki torarema.

he collected worms in a place where rocks stood up. maa ke mape hothothopramope ha kohoromi shipe torarema.

to look for, to search. torarema.

now they are returning to the collective dwelling. hei tehe the pe shimoo koã kupiyei.

to gather; to return to live in the dwelling (after camping in the forest). shimoo.

armpit hair (lit. pei hakamisi koi.

hair. koi.

she put the two gallinetas to cook and hung them (over the fire). i ha yaumakini.

gallinetas (type of bird). yaumakini.

I am hungry. kumiti nouku.

to be hungry. kumiti.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been fixed (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie firmly in many turns, to secure solidly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. tetai.

ellos (los dos) no tomaron inmediatamente las plantas de yuca, sólo trajeron raíces. teapi haionomi, e kokoki shiro yehipireherima.

ellos (los dos) no tomaron inmediatamente las plantas de yuca, sólo trajeron raíces. teapi.

to smooth, to make smooth and moist. frakaha.

dripped, trickled, streamed. poyorayou.

to start to crush or flatten something by hitting it with a stick. yatikiprai.

I will descortezar the trees and collect the hallucinogen, I will pulverize it, pour it into a gourd and say (to my younger brother): "take this hanging gourd, it is for you". kamiyeni epena ke ya e pe re yoaiwei, ya e pe ha kopeaprani, ya e pe hishi ha thaprani: "pei ahe ki yaua kure".

to descortezar (strip bark from) trees and collect hallucinogenic powder. yoaiwei.

to be sick, to be infected by shawara (evil spirits). awarapi.

we advanced a little and (already) the sun is declining. wãisipi yamaki ha ukuikini the misi pata yahatotoaherii.

the sun is declining. yahatotoaherii.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

really very sweet. yaiopiwe.

Carpintero verdoso fue el primero en descubrir el curare. ripuhusiriweni mamokori wa hapa tararei no kureshi.

curare. ripuhusiriw.

laid an egg. umokoyoripirayou.

moths. uwãuwãmi.

plant, carricillo; Olyra latifolia (Poaceae). horema u siki.

put on the head. yarikoa.

to inform, warn, advise (reciprocal form). yimirãyou.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

yãmonashi. yãmonashi.

don't you say that you don't have any more tobacco. wa hoã ma re horiwei.

everyone knows that the tapirs are infested with ticks. shama pe ma re toripiwei.

they are not pijiguao (it is evident). rasha ke ki hore ma re mai.

it is evident, it is obvious. horiwei.

(related word, no clear translation provided). mamiki horoko.

he deposited the fire on the dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke ﬁ pata poko fewe ha, wake makekema.

dry. fhewe.

to paint dots on someone. tipikiai.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just passed through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

to whiten, to become clean. aushiai.

we will return in the morning tomorrow. henaha pemaki koo henaope.

tomorrow morning I will go to harvest corn (by breaking off the ears by hand). yono ya moku keai henaope.

in the morning, at dawn. henaope.

the fishing line does not break, even when catching a big fish. yuri pata re pe weio ma kui ãsitha hetiimi tharei.

the chain vine broke. rasirasi thotho pata hetii re kuketayowei.

to break, tear, split, crack. hetiimi.

fat, big (living being). hutehea.

to make boil, to bring to a boil. yoru.

the pulp of the mahei tree. mahei pe shãhe.

the flesh of the shosho fruits stuck to the skin. shosho moku shãhe warioma.

I'm going to try the flesh of the apia fruits. apia ya ki shãhe ta wapa.

egg yolk. fshãhe nat h e.

flesh, pulp, interior. fshãhe.

he obstructed the orifice of the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

obstructed, closed, blocked. kahukema.

¿vas a comer. wa re iyarayoi.

to eat. iyarayoi.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to have walked through water, to have waded. irorokei.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied one higher than the other. mi wereheo.

to be unbalanced (canoe). werehou.

you will fight with sticks. wamaki sheyou kupei.

to hit each other. sheyou.

the tree top is swaying (the tree is going to fall). pe he hi wekei ke a kure.

to lean, to tilt. wekei.

keeping herself at a distance, she parted her hair and looked for lice. noma pe ha taeni, rapa ha e pe hapreshama.

she kept herself apart. hapreshama.

What are you hitting over there. weti ke wa tuyei ta kurawe.

state/duration at a distance, obligatorily with interrogative. rawe.

the vultures have a bald skull. watupa pe hesi tahawe.

to suffer naturally from partial baldness. hesi tahawe.

when the fire was fully lit, Siroromi appeared. kai ke wake pata parai hitititou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

they entered the dwelling when they were fully painted. the pe yãmou hititiprou tehe shapono hami pe harayoma.

to be fully realized, completed, terminated. hititi.

the dog discovered a danta and started barking at it. hiimani shama ke a ha shurukuruni, a nowã tayoma.

to bark at someone, to shout (dog). tayoamai.

I will return. ya hua korayou.

to return, to come back. korayou.

to have hunger for a certain time. wãheprao.

temporarily vacant dwelling or camp. mathokoprou.

when the waters of the flood had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami (carried by the current) were passing one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma (mit.

to have been emptied or filled halfway. hayaroa.

I am the one who will shoot it. kamiyeni ya niyaprai ta totihio.

I responded immediately to their shots, they were heard groaning. ya pe niyaprai nokarayoma, pe rããmorãy o ma.

to shoot an arrow, to fire a shot. niyaprai.

I keep the hekura inside my chest. pãrimi ya pe wai huwepou totihitao thare ke.

to possess hekura within one. perimapou.

to have itchy rashes (perfect aspect of the inchoative verb). shihitipirayou.

they burned the dead body today. hei tehe pe pomorayoma.

he didn't answer quickly and got heated up (= got heated up before answering). a wã huo haionomi, the pomoma.

to warm up, to heat up, to burn a dead body. pomo.

to be afraid. kirii.

to be afraid. kiri.

type of bamboo point. punraerae.

I have protected the tobacco by putting sticks all around it. pee ya nahe hikorokema.

to protect an object (generally a plant) by surrounding it with sticks stuck in the ground. hikoroãi.

Cachicamo ate all the honey and left. moro upe waa ha hititirini a harayoma (mit.

ate. hititirini.

dusty, covered in dust. hekãhekãpi.

the fish that swirl in large quantities (= the fish that swim in large quantities in the river). hei ki re shurirorati.

to start revolving, being stirred up or swirling in large quantities. shuririprou.

the Waika kept me suffering reiteratively. yamareki wãri nini thai ma tharei (mit.

to suffer reiteratively. petaohe.

he undid the ropes that held the lianas of his hammock in place. thoo thoku he kushesheprarema.

my older brother comes towards me and lies down in my hammock made with lianas. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

hammock made with lianas of the masimasi species. kushesheprarema.

despite everything I slipped between the cut trees. kayapa hiki mohe re yoare hami ya hirerea he yatikema.

to slip under, to slide under. hirereai.

We are hekura with bead necklaces around our chests, and we go towards you. tope u harehatimi yamaki te huope ye.

necklace. huope.

to grow, to fatten. huteheai.

Daughter, beware of the quicksand, it attracts people so that you and your husband can gather pijiguaos for me. heãrohe sho rashaye ke ki ta yuapi: hija, valos terrenos movedizos, atrae a las personas hayan tú y tu marido a recoger pijiguaos para mí.

The demon of the quicksand dragged him into the depths of its pit. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei (mit.

The master of the quicksands approached me (with a certain purpose). heãhãturiweni ware nape rii shurukou kuprei.

demonio maligno de la clase yai the asociado a los terrenos movedizos, atrae a las personas hacia el fondo de la cavidad cenagosa que él habita. heãhãturiwe.

he put it on the ground. a wai ha prakini.

to possess an object with a handle attached by being wedged into a split stick. haomapou.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to shoot many arrows at a target without hitting it. tishikiãi.

Bee. hihipa. It nests in tree hollows. Se aloja en huecos de árboles.

bee. hihipa.

bee (unidentified species). suhehetu.

los hekura matarán un jaguar. ama ikoto a prapou yaiopehe (cha.

jaguar. ikoto.

to pile up on top of each other. yayo.

they spend time making love. a shiro wamotii.

we had been stopped for a good while when the noise was heard. yamaki uprahatio tehe yetu the ã petariyo kurei.

expresses the duration or repetition of the same action for a certain time. wamotii.

crotch of a tree. hiki hãkãrãki.

Fork, crotch (of a tree). hãkãrãki.

to cover someone. he oromashimoprariyo.

sinuous, having many meanders (streams of water). shãkoko.

jo, déjame bajar (de tu espalda). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit.

to let descend (someone one is carrying on one. rápiitho.

to fabricate an object whose surface is wide. thepahakei.

to tie, to bind, to tie up with a long rope (a load to carry on the back). prihãkei.

you used to come back with your back bent from the weight of the food. wa ki niipi kãi hute terekeprou tharei.

to bend over from a heavy load, to bend the back, to become able to crawl (stage of child growth). terekeprou.

he is wet. a here.

wet. here.

to have had a vertigo. mi pe shiwãrihirayou.

to regularly have vertigos. mi pe shiwãrihiwe.

1. to have a vertigo, a dizziness 2. to lose all point of reference, to get confused, to not recognize oneself. shiwãrihi.

he suddenly put his hand on the hanging leaves. henaki re teihiawei hami, imiki wãri wariprakema.

to hang down, to incline downwards (of leaves or branches). teihiawei.

to see in dreams people from whom one is separated, or to see distant places. kuramarei.

(he/she/it) surfaced. kapokoo.

to surface, to come up. kapoko.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to divide, separate, split apart. teke.

bamboo. hirorai.

I have cold. ya wahati.

they are two orphans. wahati ke kipi.

to be cold, to have cold, to be an orphan. wahati.

they are back and their voices are suddenly heard. pei the pe koprããi yaro, the pe ãhã pakayupraikiyoni.

their voices are suddenly heard. pakayupraikiyoni.

to become scarce, to become depleted. esheshããi.

I am in disagreement, you see, I do not approve and remain silent. ya puhi reatarou ha totihioni, "awei", ya kuu mai re ya kua totihipei ma re kuhe.

not to stop being in disagreement or opposing a decision. reatarou.

while Horonami remained in the house, his son went to where Titiri was lamenting. horonami yahi a kuo heai tehe, pe ihirupi titiri a re miã ikinowei hami a ukukema.

to go to where someone is lamenting. ikinowei.

piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

piled up, stacked up (firewood). yototamama.

the child fondles his/her eye. i h iru a mamo hupeo.

to touch oneself, to fondle. hupeo.

I also. kamiye sho.

Dormilona and Tigra cazadora painted their bodies (myth). wathaperariwe sho, wereshãã sho the kipi yãmou kupariyoma.

Baba and his wife had the custom of going alone to the forest to cook their packages of caterpillars on the coals (myth). iwariwe sho, pe suwepi sho, uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaatii re ayaowei.

also, equally, with; in company of; it also has a coordinating function. wapepraa.

to consume the ashes of a dead person mixed with ripe banana puree. fishipe koai.

ashes. fishipe.

we were close to the goal when we regrouped on a rocky hill. yamaki ahetou tehe pei maki ha yamaki hirakema.

to group together quickly. hiratakei.

they eat. pe iyaprou.

1. To start eating. 2. To eat (plural subject). 3. To consume the ashes of a deceased person, to organize a funeral ceremony.. iyaprou.

The woodpecker clung to the curare vine and pecked it (the pecking sounds were heard). mamokori ira ke a yaupe ha ripuhusiwe a ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

short and rapid blows, like the pecking of a bird. ripuhusiwe.

you will give birth with pain (lit. wa ihirupi wayuope.

your son will be brave. wayuope.

the sun is at the zenith. mothoka yororowe.

to be vertical. yororo.

I have a cough. ya thokopi.

to have a cough, to be sick with a cold. thokopi.

his two sons, who were shamans, stayed behind to elevate the shelters a little (to prevent them from being submerged). pe ihirupi e kipi re hekuraonowei, e kipi hãtopi nahi tireheaprarou heoma.

to rise/elevate a little, to make a little higher. tirehe-.

name. tonaun.

to start squeezing or pressing something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand. ãhuhuprai.

to keep one's eyes closed. misi yahokei.

to keep one. yahokei.

apresúrate en golpearlo. fa wai shetai.

to hit, to strike. wapayou.

down feather. osheoshepi.

the two women ran away. suwe ke kipi shi wahi ayoherii.

since the woman was in love with him, she ran away with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

1. fugitive woman who has abandoned her community and husband (to join a lover or stop being mistreated). 2. (intransitive verb) to run away, abandon one. shuwahi.

well. bien.

to cover hastily, to cover precipitately. raprakei.

kinship term. pusiwe.

to hit, to strike, to collide. tihekikelo.

the kneecap is the shapono of the hekura. pei maheko re kui, ei hekura pei pe shaponopi.

knee, kneecap. maheko.

how abundant the tapir tracks could be. are pe mãyo heherama.

to exaggerate, to boast (of valor, warlike or sexual exploits, hunting ability); to tell, in an admiring tone, how abundant the hunt or fruits of the forest were, how big an animal was, etc.. heherai.

to have made something yellow, to have left something to burn (and become yellow). frãrãpramarei.

hija mía, ve a buscar (= a recoger) mis pijiguaos. oãsi, rashaye ke ki ta yuatu.

yo tomo un solo arco. tahiapi hãto ya nahi yuai.

to go to get, to go to look for. yuaprai.

to hollow out (multiple objects). hororomai.

to empty or fill. hayaroai.

shout when one is in a dangerous situation, call for help. sirãrãmou.

to shout when one is in a dangerous situation, to call for help. sirãrãmo.

it seems they want to attack me at all costs and I am still waiting for them. ware niya hoã shurukai he yatiprouhe ha ya pe no ma re tapou shoai.

to be in a state of waiting (many people in different places). taprawe.

to point with a finger. imiki himio.

to point with a finger, to indicate with a finger. himio.

the moon begins to wane. peripo a ayakosiai.

the moon begins to wane. ayakosiai.

the hekura started smiling. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

to smile for a moment. waterayou.

The wood split longitudinally. Wake eriri ama.

to split longitudinally. eriri.

the woman was truly pregnant. suwe a shipenaa ha yairini.

the woman was pregnant and could not go fast. suwe ke a shipenapi yaro a haiprou maoma.

to be pregnant. maka*.

he would very much like to exchange his sister for another woman (= he would very much like to give his sister as a wife to a man in exchange for another woman to marry). pe yai a nomihãi shi toprao.

to exchange, to trade, to swap, to substitute, to relieve, to follow in succession. nomihãi.

(habla del sur del Orinoco. hãto nahitha si potehe.

to tense, to become satiated. poteheai.

tranquil. mohotupe.

I'm going with the others to fetch water. mãu ya u ta ishakomai nareo sho.

to join others to go fetch water from the river (humorous). ishakomai.

he is cured completely. a temi heikiprou.

to be in a certain state; very. heiki.

the rope of the canoe has come undone. kanawa a natha kusheprariyoma.

to come undone, to become untied (in multiple places). sheprariyoma.

he is happy. misi yahoyaho.

to be happy. yahoyaho.

to bend or arch the lower back when feeling pain. yapreke.

to line up for a moment. wirinatou.

I will make the provisional shelter (or the shapono) very carefully. yano ya toprakei.

I will carefully put the feathers on the arrow. shereka ya he toprapei.

to do carefully. topraai.

the tapirs were coming swimming in the river one after the other. shama pe pata karei nomihou kupariyoma (cha.

since Terewe's son pronounces my personal name in public, I will pronounce his in turn. terewe ihirupini ware si re poape, ya si poai ta nomihio.

to do in turn, to succeed, to relieve. nomihi.

being deloused. nomahaciéndose.

to leave a bit of food. fshee heprai.

to leave, to abandon. fshee.

to set apart a gourd in which the crushed bones of a male relative are found, in order to consume its contents. fãhuku kushai.

the small baskets became beautiful when they were separated. morã pe re kui pe pe kushai tehe riyehewe e pe kua shoarayoma.

to separate, to set apart. kushai.

as (the turtle) had its head sunk (in the shell), it observed it and turned it over several times. pei ke pe he wai taroa ha yairini, a mima, pe mi hatuatarama (mit.

to become deep, to sink deeply. taroa.

retomen tierra firme dispersándose. pe ta hashirio rãikiomopotu.

to disembark on land one after the other. hashiripraai.

mustache (lit. hutosi koi.

upper lip. hutosi.

it is there where they intend to go for a long hunting trip. kiha pe pe niya heniyomou kuprei.

to go for a long hunting trip. heniyomou.

platanal. ara.

now the enemies have approached (lit. re ahetepraruhe.

I was under the influence of hallucinogens in the early morning. re henaopoi (cha. and also it can be The word 're' in Yanomami means 'to'. ): en la mañanita estuve bajo la inﬂuencia de alucinógenos.

he will go to the forest and also it can be The word 're' in Yanomami means 'a/an'. hei ai yoka re horere.

went to the place where and also it can be The word 're' in Yanomami means 'the'. re uprayahi ha.

now. re.

they had placed themselves one next to the other and Macagua was directing them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to dig repeatedly in the ground or earth to make the hole wider and deeper. theiakei.

to have hidden or concealed behind something (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). shãhorayou.

confused noise. sharai.

Onomatopoeia. shara.

(he) grabbed the head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to split in two equal parts. huhetiprai.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

to move, to displace oneself. ãweãwemou.

aunque allá el enemigo sea aterrorizante, yo me propongo atacarlo (lit. kihi kitanari a pata re fuopiyei, a no ma kiriai tehe, a nape niya rii keo totihiawe.

puma. totihiawe.

they had only recently been cremated. the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

recent, new. tutoo.

who was then that woman. weti ke wa the kãi wãri ta suwe ta kunowe sihe ke.

for whom and why are they having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriamoãi ta sihewe.

to wonder, to ask oneself. kunowe.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cacao plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma (mit.

the great rock started to oscillate. pei maki pata opi raitou waikioma.

to incline, lower, give way. rãkoko.

woody shell containing a nut. kosisi.

he responded immediately to Titiri's whistle. titiri kasi ã wãri hirirayou ha a kasi ã nokaprariyo.

respond immediately to a whistle. nokaprou.

piece of wood provided with a notch that is placed at the end of an arrow, in which the bowstring is placed during a shot and also it can be The word 'mayepi' in Yanomami means 'bejuco masimasi'. mayepi shereka (pei) naka.

(no clear translation provided). mayepi.

Jaguar dormía con la cabeza volcada. ncima ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma.

cabeza. mi pata.

I forgot the path. ya yo nohi mraakema.

to forget, not to remember. nohi mraakei.

to hold each other by the shoulders during a hunting ritual. hãkihiwe.

I forgave you (but I have not forgotten). pe nohi asipou poo.

to forgive a serious offense; to renounce revenge. asiamai.

we ate the birds first, then they put the guabinas to roast on the fire. yoo pesi yama pe waa ha shomarini, kuma ma pe hãro yaprai piyeahe.

to do first, to do apart. shoma-.

Woodpecker was without support (at the treetop) and was extending its neck turning its head in all directions. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

extending the neck moving the head. katiapraroma.

I will make it cook (stirring the broth), I will stir it, then I will eat it, I will eat it. ya ha niyaprarini, ya ha tikuruarini, ya wai ta yaio, ya wai ta yaio.

I will make it cook (stirring the broth). niyaprarini.

since you have women, lie down in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yãhãhemayou.

small stream. yoãyoãmo.

the Yanomami have acclimatized it in their plantations to revive it (lit. los Yãnomãmi lo han aclimatado cía para resucitarlo (lit. : to make its breath come out again). : para hacer que su hálien sus plantaciones.

acclimatize. aclimatar.

(he/she/it) swims lightly under the water surface, like a fish. pe nahe mope ureu si, purinama usi.

to swim lightly under the surface of the water, to move along the surface of something; to begin to sprout. ureu.

to give. pihimo.

parece que la gente de Shãshãnãwe los hizo cruzar el río en el raudal Karepe. karepe pora hami shãshãnãwe theri pe ãhã pekakuamatayomahe.

a place name. Shãshãnãwe.

the monster rahara swallowed the Waika messenger of the feast. rahara ke kini waika ke the teshomopi re suhareiwei (mit.

to swallow, to devour. suhareiwei.

I have slippery hands and everything slips out of them. ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

to slide, slip, glide down a slope. yoho.

Õmawe perforated the ground with his bow to get water because his son was thirsty. omawe ihirupi amishiã ha hãto nahini u hiwehama.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

to perforate, to bore, to make a hole by pressing with a pointed object. hiwehama.

to have the edge folded or rolled up naturally. wapurewe.

because I am a turtle eater. totori watimi ya kutaeni.

everyone knows that I am a jaguar killer. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

graceful expression. watimi.

ellos tienen tubos huecos a lo largo de sus flancos. pei the pe repoku hami thora re ke ki hiririprawe.

tubos huecos a lo largo de sus flancos. hiririprawe.

when you collected the bones of the cremated dead, did you carefully search (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

to search for scattered or mixed fragments. prorurou.

I take beads (I grab a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to catch, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). hohi.

to have become loose, to have become slack. preyukurayou.

when they hesitate at the beginning of a song, then they continue in the same way. ãmoã ihi wãisipi a ora huhetaihe tehe ihi re a huhehuhemai shoamouhe.

to hesitate, to waver, to falter. huhetai.

to feel a tickle in the throat when having a cold. horerewe.

as they climbed a steep rock, Kasimi had vertigo. pei maki ha pe ha yãmothoni, kasimi a shi kirihoma.

to have vertigo (perfective form). kirihirariyo.

now, on this occasion, they really come. hei tehe pe yai kooimai.

they really talked about Sherekanawe. sherekanawe a no wã yaimo thai yaiomahe.

it is here that, when the night monkey cries out, it has the habit of repeating its cry frequently. eyeha re pe e heni, hawe rishima koko pata yapikamai yaioma u ushishi mi paai yaimou tharei (mit.

to insist on the reality of the action undertaken, or of the situation described; to repeat, to produce frequently; to have the habit of. yaimo.

son, prepare a bark rope to carry me. pusi yare natha ta thakiyo.

will they finally prepare that rope for (carrying) the pot. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

bark rope, cord made from tree bark used for carrying loads. fãifãiyomi.

to arch one. ipresi.

on firm ground. fhashiri hami.

on firm ground, by land route. fhashiri.

sweet honey of the yãmonã bee. yãmonã.

to refuse to accept a gift, an object, a portion of food. waii.

1. waio.

to refuse to accept a gift, object, or portion of food. wai.

to be jealous. wãrikoshiomi.

they observe the morichal. siki miihe.

they observe the morichal. miihe.

to be. hisi.

to beautify; to make an animal beautiful by feeding it well. riyeheamai.

upriver speech. feni.

also the women scratch themselves with a sharp stick during the ritual of their first menstruation. suwe pe yipimou tehe pe kãi hãsikou.

ritual of a girl. unokãimou.

(if you continue like this) lamentably I will be forced to hit you (on the way). pe wãri shea tikoreferiiwe.

lamentably, unfortunately. tikoreferiiwe.

the meat of the babilla gets stuck between my teeth (habitually). pei ya naki ha iwa yãhi hikokãi.

to be wedged in, to be stuck in. hokokãi.

adult age (growth stage of large birds). koriromaprou.

quitaba con las patas la tierra del hueco que cavaba. kekumama.

quitaba con las patas la tierra del hueco que cavaba. kekumama.

be conscious of what you are doing, content yourself with threatening (without acting, out of cowardice). wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

be conscious of what you are doing, content yourself with threatening (without acting, out of cowardice). wararaparuni.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

these fruits are excellent. e ki wai ta toprar e.

to feel joy, satisfaction or happiness; to be content; to be pleasant or enjoyable. topra.

to invite. shoa.

to be twisted locally, to be twisted only at one point. torokoa.

to sneeze. esikamou.

coithãã: to rest on the ground (an empty container). coithãã: reposar sobre el suelo (un recipiente honmo tenían miedo (de él), los antepasados no se do).

to rest. reposar.

my two older brothers ate it. ãiwe ke kipini the wapirema.

they two ate it. wapirema.

Rabipelado got up from the hammock and went towards the two women who were crying over the dead person. suwe re ke kipi puhi re hãkihihou hami nãro a hoketou re shoarayouwei.

to grab by the shoulders (plural subject). hãkihou.

to accompany someone back. nosi yukeyoruu.

to return. yukeyoruu.

the woman's breasts were erect and firm, she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. suwe hãkãmiki ha sherereikuni, suwe ke a yokoapraroma.

to have erect and firm breasts. shererewe.

their corpses were strewn on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

they found the black-painted sorcerers strewn (dead) on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

to scatter, spread, strew on the ground. tikukou.

we eat the honey and then we go on our way. puu yama upe ha koararini yamaki kurayoheriiwei.

we go on our way. kurayoheriiwei.

to let saliva drool (durative, plural acts). kahu upe ukukãi.

he let his saliva drool, and then sucked it back up. kama kahu upe ukurayoma.

to let saliva drool and then suck it back up before it falls (a game played by young people under the influence of hallucinogens). ukukãi.

while he was occupied, he glanced at his son-in-law who was raising his face towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni, pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

to glance, to take a quick look. mitai.

my mother-in-law pretends that the wapu fruits are hard to roast on the coals. yãyeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai thai.

mother-in-law. yãyeni.

while they were eating honey, Yãri went very far away. thomiriyoma ke a wã wãhami a kopema.

to go very far away, to move away. wãhami.

they will really get tired. wamaki motai totihiope.

when you open our hive (to harvest our honey) you will get tired (we have so much honey). yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope (mit.

to be always tired. motaprou.

to be hung in the void. reikiwe.

they cut chuzos from manaka palm stems very quickly. manaka si sherisheria re yaiapotayonowehei.

to do something very quickly. sherisheria.

before yesterday. fai the weya ha.

yesterday. fweya.

stomach pains make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. turekamai.

remember all of you that your isolation has already caused you much unhappiness. a no yãmiri preaprarou waikioma tao, wamaki puﬁ wãri kuu fa hatukeomopotuni.

to be alone (in a given situation, to do something). yãmiri.

to clean an object, make white, paint or color white. ãweãweprarou.

1. paruri hesikaki yãpou.

neck skin and crest of the curassow bird; bracelet made from them. paruriye.

the true tobacco species. pee nahe yai.

they two made the (first) true bamboo tips and also it can be The word 'yai' in Yanomami means '(verb with adverbial function, emphasizes the reality of the action)'. rahaka yai re the ki tapia re piyerareiwei.

are there really mamure vines. masi kua yairawe.

true, real, authentic. yai.

mother-in-law, let's stay here. yape, eyeha peheki ta kuo.

your mother-in-law. yaahe.

señalar con el dedo. fimiki himio.

to point with a finger. himi.

to extinguish (a fire). ãkikãi.

shout when one is in a dangerous situation, call for help. sirãrãmou.

to shout when one is in a dangerous situation, to call for help. sirãrãmo.

I cannot walk fast when the pain in my thigh becomes more intense. naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

pain. wakusi.

if you look at them you will make them sick. ke ki ha a wãshimi horua mahirayoma (mit.

get sick. mahirini.

it is necessary that you divide in two the deer's thigh. haya wa waku ha hakaroprarini.

to divide in two a fruit by cutting it in the indicated way, to split in two a round object by applying traction with the hands on the opposite edges. hakaroprai.

to have a pale complexion or light color. rumaha.

we climbed the mountain and reached the summit. yamaki mi re yãmopeheriiwei, yamaki mi re totoparekiriowei.

we climbed the mountain and reached the summit. yãmopeheriiwei.

generic term applied to two common vulture species in the Upper Orinoco: the black vulture, Coragyps atratus, and the king vulture, Sarcorhampus papa, of the Cathartidae family. watupa.

to scratch with the nails, generally to remove the red spots caused by the bites of gnats. tisikikei.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to arm a bow to hit a specific target. pehi iyomai.

to tense a bow. iyomai.

the branch is longer than the others. hiki poko rayokowe.

to protrude (of a branch). rayokowe.

to divide (a long object), bifurcate, split, become bifid; to divide into two groups that follow divergent directions. pakaraprou.

why are they dancing and having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriãmoãi ta sihewe.

to have fun during a party, to do funny things during the presentation dance. iriãmoãi.

in the past the Waika did not know the croaking of the little frog wawa hena. waika ke peni wawa ke the hena wã hapa tanomihe.

small frog (probably of the genus Hyla). wawa.

supernatural female being associated with lightning. yãmirãi.

he did not sleep during the night. a shimakamou he haruma.

to not sleep at all during the night, to stay awake all night. shimakamou.

naha. weti*.

to rise up, acquire a bad position (leaves of a roof). posusukei.

elder. mayor.

don't look at others while hiding. a mi yeheatihe.

to peek, to spy, to observe stealthily. yeheai.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pe re koyokaiwei, ya pe nowã thaa shoarei kurei.

to mix, to put together different objects or substances, to mix different hallucinogens, to mix beads of different colors. koyokoai.

(they) shave the head of the young man, when he goes to the forest. a ruruaprarai ha kutaruni, pe wai puhio ke yaro, he re mãrokoshi.

to shave the head. mãrokoshi-.

to have covered one. oromashimorayou.

to become short. horotoprai.

they will scratch you and you will bleed. rukekotii kukei.

they will scratch you. rukekotii.

(he/she/it) maintained balance in a wavering manner. hehehou kukei.

to maintain balance in a wavering manner. hehehou.

in the place where the muddy bottom emerges above the water. u katikatipi re repiyeti ha.

muddy bottom that emerges from the water during the dry season. katikatipi.

to make a circular motion in the water; to clean a container with water by making a circular motion with the hand, to wash a cloth by making that motion; to stir the water in a circle with the foot to make the fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yaprokai.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

sin. kashora.

to tear or cut several objects into several strips. sheririrarei.

Nosiriwe cried (for lack of tobacco). nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

In all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

1. Ancestor who spread tobacco. 2. This word is used in certain regions to refer to tobacco.. nosiriwe.

el hambre me atormenta y me pregunto qué hacer, ni siquiera tengo ocumo para cocinar. ohi pe wayu ha ya puhi wetinahamou yaro, ohina ya moku tuai ma marani.

ocumo. oﬁna.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pamento.

to fall one by one, to scatter (fruits, flowers, etc.). praririai.

to make something die, to kill. ahimarei.

leaf of the banana plant. kuratha si hena.

banana plant about to flower. kuratha si moko.

yes. si.

when a woman performs the ritual of her first menstruation, her husband also does it. suwe a yipimou tehe pe heãropi sho.

to have dizziness, vertigos. yipipi.

the voice of the ancestor came from the depth of the den. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni.

from a distance. parutu.

to be clean, to be white. aushi.

my scalp hurts from the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to experience a painful sensation due to a superficial injury (an irritation, a skin tear, a burn, a blister, etc.). hushi.

to let an enemy escape. hihoataramai.

noise made by a living being. terei.

the women will certainly see the mortar (when we crush the bones of those we have killed). suwe ke pe wãrini hii ke hi ka mii totihipehe.

Mortar. Mortero.

malaria. prisiprisi.

to prevent touching or grabbing something, to prohibit the use or consumption of something. wãmai.

ellos nos hicieron huir. yamareki yashurema.

expulsar de ira. yatirawe.

to make slightly curved the wall of an object that is being made. wãheteãmãi.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

muscle, flesh (as opposed to other body parts or organs); pulp of a fruit, sapwood of a bark. yãhiyãhi.

to prohibit; to tell someone not to participate in a fight or war (said once). wapekeai.

he returned directly where he was. a shariria re korãyoherima.

to go and get information correctly oneself. wãno shaririamai.

1. To straighten, become straight, correct oneself. 2. To go directly towards (this second meaning is not used by speakers south of the Orinoco River, who prefer to use the lexeme katiti-). 3. To straighten (make straight or linear). 4. To give something directly to someone, without intermediaries. 5. To receive something directly from the giver.. sharirai.

to keep something in a container inside which the objects are compressed. kaopou.

at night the hekura shake the cords of the hammock, they wake you up. titi ha hekura peni thoku thaki pe yomipraaihe, pe the hushuuhe.

cords of a hammock. thokuthaki.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small stakes planted around it). here ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, dwelling or camp by erecting a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or stakes planted in the ground). ithorokop.

he became "pregnant" in the calf (lit. hei the pe re euhuawei ha ihiru a yetea shoakema.

to swell, dilate, progressively increase in height (of an elongated object). euhu.

in a place where the river was straight the otter started swimming again at the surface of the water. pe u shaririope hami proro ke a wãri urerou kooimama.

to swim at the surface of the water. kooimama.

1. Kinship term, 3rd person. niyoãi.

to eat rapidly. wãkewãkemou.

is it so. fihi thawe.

is it so? / did they succeed? (asked to warriors returning from an attack). fihi.

to build a footbridge to cross a stream. ihirãmorayou.

gavilán, ave de rapiña (Buteo sp). shokãtãma ãshi.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

1. To become brighter, clearer (the sky, the day). 2. To discern, see, distinguish clearly. 3. To be clear, bright (the sky, the day).. hire.

then I gather a large amount of hekura and send them in a troop towards him. iha ya pe komi yototopraamai re kupariyowei.

to send in a herd or troop (towards someone under the effects of hallucinogens). yototopraamai.

flaunt. mayoko.

Jaguar was sleeping with his head tilted back. ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma.

to have a side, to be tilted. werehe.

to become numerous. yaharaprou.

did you prepare wapu fruits again. wapu wama pe thai koo ayaonomi.

prepared. ayaonomi.

even though they walked dispersing in the forest, the beast would find their tracks again. the ki pao reikio ma yaiomopotayouwei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni.

dispersing/scattering in the forest. yaiomopotayouwei.

disperse (while walking). pe ta rãikiroheri.

they had abandoned the path each one at a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni (mit.

disperse (while walking); manifest in various different places. rãikiroheri.

¿cuándo, en qué momento. weti ke tehe.

when, at what moment. tehe.

Zool. Zool. , generic term that applies to several species of swifts, including the Panyptila cayennensis (= White-collared Swift). , término genérico que se aplica a varias especies de vencejos, entre los que se encuentra la Panyptila cayennensis (= Vencejito collar blanco).

generic term for several species of swifts. shoro.

(to cover the roof of a dwelling), factual; (to cover the roof of a dwelling), perfective, plural object or plural subject; (to cover the roof of a dwelling), perfective. yãmãpou, fact.

to cover the roof of a dwelling. yãmãpou.

¿a quién. weti ke iha.

to whom?. iha?.

to be perforated. wareshea.

ya ellos nos odian. pemareki nohi wãripou waikiwehe.

they hate us. waikiwehe.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small sticks stuck around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, a dwelling or a camp by erecting a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or poles planted in the ground). ithorokoãi.

to give something without asking for anything in return, to give freely. fshiroko ha.

to give something without asking for anything in return, to give freely. fshiroko.

the chigüires invited the butterflies to a feast. kayurifanariwe peni hurari pe shoamahe.

to invite a group of people (family, community) to share food. kayurifanari.

we came out of the water where the path is, we walked for a while on flat ground, and then we sat down. yo re hashiriawei ha yamaki ha hashiriikini, yamaki he ha yariyaritaikini, yamaki rokei.

we sat down. hashiriikini.

saved (the infant) by giving water (to feed it). mãu u ha a mi thapoma.

saved (the infant) by giving water (to feed it). mãu u ha a mi thapoma.

I clean the tube for inhaling drugs (by removing with a small stick inside). thora ya ka hishãi.

to capture the soldier termites of the foshe aka species by introducing a small stick into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). foshe aka hishãi.

to tickle by introducing and agitating a thin stick or feather. hishãh.

to start to do something (durative, plural object). payoprai.

these arrow canes that sprout profusely, I go to gather them (to make arrows). k ihi siki re shororimore, ya ki rii teaprai kutaeni.

to sprout well, to grow vigorously (plant). shororimou.

trancar, encerrar, sostener con firmeza un objeto entre otros dos. wãkiãi.

his younger brother. kihi kawei.

younger relative of the same sex. kawei-.

to receive a part. hakaropei.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). kasitamakei.

a variety of tobacco with broad leaves. tharathara.

he is irritating. a no wãri hushuai.

they are unbearable. pe pe no wãri hushuai.

to be unbearable, to be insolent, to bother, to annoy, to irritate. hushuai.

his arrows always hit the target. a yaketoi mi.

to hit the target, to leave a mark. imiki*.

when the fire was fully lit, Siroromi appeared. kai ke wake pata parai hitititou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

they entered the dwelling when they were fully painted. the pe yãmou hititiprou tehe shapono hami pe harayoma.

to be fully realized, completed, terminated. hititi.

a concave mark (due to a fold, a blow or pressure). wãhihikei.

to gather, to group together. iriki.

they put chili peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke/cure incompletely (a prey or fish); not to dry perfectly. weheroray.

to perforate, to make a hole in a wall, to open an orifice in a hollow trunk, to open a package with fingers to take something out of it. horoshoai.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

to take borrowed, to borrow. mahiãi.

to be clear, limpid, translucent, white; to be under someone. fherushihi.

to be dirty, to be stained with mud or covered in ashes. toteshiprou.

do not come visiting with empty hands. yororotou koo tikootihe.

I shot vertically. yororowe ya the niyakema.

to stand vertically, to be vertical, perpendicular to the ground. yororoã.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

to become brighter, to clear up (the sky, the clarity of the day). hiraha.

¿dónde vives. weti ha pei ke wa peria kure.

¿dónde están los váquiros. weti hami ware ke ki kua.

where?. ¿dónde?.

hard, rigid, stiff. hihu.

(an animal) shakes itself (when wet). t yomisiprou.

shake (something wet, like a wet animal or dog). yomisi.

to be green/unripe, to become green. riyeai.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma.

faint noise, barely perceptible. warakuawe.

the blood painted his mouth. kahiki pe wãri iye warukumoma.

to paint a thick line around the mouth and from the extension of the corner of the lips, across the cheeks to the ears. warukumoma.

to let ripen. fetema.

to let ripen, to allow to ripen. fetema.

to remain lying on belly for a long time. rehotao.

it is damaged, it is lost. wãrimo u.

to be damaged, to be lost. wãrimo-.

to scratch someone with an object (durative, plural object). hikekai.

bot. mamokoyoma hi.

to turn over an eyelid (by playing). mamokoyoma.

small and voracious fish adorned with longitudinal bands; lives in mountain streams. sharu.

to cry for a dead person or pet, to mourn and express it by crying; to lament. hushihipi*.

trazarse líneas sinuosas sobre la mandíbula y las mejillas, partiendo de la comisura de los labios. kahiki tikeke.

to trace sinuous lines on the jaw and cheeks, starting from the corner of the lips. tike-.

to cough. othomou.

to cough. othomi.

he went anyway, even though he was told not to do anything about it. the pe ma wasii tehe, a hua he yatirayoma.

despite everything, he shot his arrows at the cows. ware ke ki niyai he yatioma.

to insist on doing something despite opposition or difficulty. yatioma.

I was moving away a lot. ya payekama.

to move away quickly. payeketakei.

I would have liked to go to see the house (of the enemies), but unfortunately it was prohibited for me; I would have killed them, but it was prohibited for me (talking about the south of the Orinoco). biera gustado ir a ver la casa (de los enemigos), pero lamentablemente me lo prohibieron; ya pe mori shema, ware a wasimahe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to go to see the house (of the enemies), but unfortunately it was prohibited; I would have killed them, but it was prohibited. wapeke.

to join a group of combatants, to come to someone. yeteprou.

soft earth that the crab has just removed from its hole. wii o k o na eyoshi.

I'm going to look for crabs. oko ya pe wai ta hupaheri sho.

crab. okona.

the noise the little one was making could be heard: he was really nursing. ihiru ke a wai kruikruimou yaioma.

to produce a noise each time a sip of liquid is swallowed; the sound a baby makes when nursing. kruikruimou.

to remove a part to offer it. hakarokei.

the two were big and soon appeared. ke kipi yareheo ha yaioni, the kipi wawetou ha yaironi.

here is where it first appeared. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

to become visible, to appear. wawe.

we stayed ambushed for a long time, then we gathered when we were tired. yamaki retaoma, yamaki reo ha mohipraruni yamaki kokãmou.

to stay ambushed for a long time. retaoma.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

to graze, scratch, reach superficially (when shooting an arrow). tiheherema.

to allow someone, to whom a canoe has been lent, to leave it in the place they choose. kanawa kãtãmãpou.

to allow someone to leave a borrowed canoe wherever they choose. kãtãmãpou.

to make love (with a man, said by a woman). moroshi wa-i.

to approach a noise or voice. titeteamai.

to place on the ground pati- (on a leaf, on a piece of clay pot, on a metal plate) a hallucinogenic substance with the purpose of consuming it. epena paai: colocar sobre el suelo pati (sobre una hoja, sobre un fragmento de vasija de barro, sobre una placa de metal) una sustancia alucinógena con el propósito de consumirla.

place. colocar.

the destructive power of my axe. ayawa koshi wakeni.

destructive power. wakeni.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

identified. identificado.

I will become blind. ya hupepirayou.

I became blind. hupepirayou.

me acerqué al lugar donde cantaba la gallineta. lehãshimo ya wã ahetemakema.

gallineta (type of bird). lehãshimo.

to have one. onimou.

now they will not remain alive, because I have the real intention of killing them. hei tehe pe temi niya kuomi, ya pe niya shei he tiherio.

to have the real intention of killing. tiherio.

give me a part of your wad of tobacco. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to undo a wad of tobacco to take out a part and offer it or for oneself. pee nahe hako.

to go, to walk. hãitaai.

it seems that the people of Shãshãnãwe made them cross the river at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami shãshãnãwe theri pe ãhã pekakuamatayomahe.

it seems they made them cross the river at the Karepe rapids. pekakuamatayomahe.

the bamboo arrows of the type ruhu masi split easily. ruhu masi pe tikaroo si ihehewe.

to split (a long object). tikaroo.

blow me hallucinogenic drug gently. opi the ta shuriripa.

to blow a dose of hallucinogenic drug to someone (through a long tube). shuririkei.

there is honey upriver (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

upriver, there where there is a sandbank. mrakatahu a re prapohori ha.

the spider monkey rests (upriver, in a tree). pasho a wãshimi horupohori.

upriver, upstream. pohori.

to feel nauseous. kamishi yoruhuwe.

to feel nauseous, to feel sick, to feel dizzy. yoruhuwe.

to have fluidified (terminative). hereshiprou.

to fall and get caught. wahehai.

the great rock came slowly to collide against the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki pata rakiariyoma (mit.

to lean against, to support against, to collide with. raki.

as the place was clear I discovered it immediately. the wawetope ha ya the pomiã re shoakeiwei.

to discover, notice something in the jungle. wawetope.

to stand on tiptoe. hiteshek.

soy yo quien les ofrecerá a esos dos la parte que les corresponde. kamiyeni ya kipi topei katitio totihio.

me ofrecen de nuevo pescado, vienen uno tras otro. yuri pe ha ware a topei koãhe, ware a topei notiatarouhe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to offer something to several people. toperarei.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

he fell under the weight of the load, and remained crushed under it for a long time. a ha sheikuni a hikitao heatima (mit.

to keep an object in place by pressing it with the hand or putting a weight on top of it. hikikiyo.

bow made from wood that is not hard enough. faraasi nahi.

immature, unripe, not hard enough (for making bows). faraasi.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahakei.

(type of tree). yoto nathohi.

(type of plant). rehareha nathosi.

(type of vine that a certain edible caterpillar feeds on). wayowayo natho.

plant, tree. natho.

mythical mountain where the hekura go to hunt. rãminami.

to be in a hurry. tamaparu.

to be a bad shooter. sina: ser un mal tirador.

to be a bad shooter. sina.

they hid it near the entrance. pei yoka horeope ha a hithea shoakemahe.

to hide, to conceal something. hitheai.

divide the bone. pee nahe repokosi.

divide. repokosi.

we arrived at a place where a flat rock protruded from the ground, precisely at the moment when the enemies (lit. pei masi prapariyope ha, yaro re pe katitou totihioimape ha, yamaki kupariyo kurei.

there where a flat rock protruded from the ground, at the place where the enemy warriors were heading, that's where we were (in this sentence yaro, "hunting prey", means "enemy warriors"). pei masi prapariyope ha, yaro re pe katitou totihioimape ha, yamaki kupariyo kurei.

flat rock, rocky surface. prapariyope.

to cause to be twisted locally, to cause to be twisted only at one point. torokamai.

jaguar, hombre valeroso (diálogo ceremonial) (lit. fmihi a pata re nosiyemoyahi.

to growl. nosiyemo.

tree (unidentified). turayema.

to spread out, to extend (in surface area); to become wide (a hammock). hauhai.

to start making something viscous or sticky. yãrekeprai.

they died. nomarariyo.

the dog was called Tokorinawe, it was very big. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

to be called, to have as a name. kuowei.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ya ishorayoma.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ishorayoma.

I will try. ya the ta wapa.

1. To try, attempt, dare. 2. To experience, try, taste. 3. To measure, compare. wapeai.

to pile up, to heap up (fruits). pororomakei.

she ran changing slope. the rereai mohe hoteaherima.

she ran changing slope. hoteaherima.

to use a magic plant (Caladium bicolor) to retain someone (a husband or close relative who regularly visits another community to meet a lover, or a visitor one likes). shoaprai.

when he returns he will inform me. a koprou tehe yare wã him i ã p e.

inform someone of the location of something in the forest (fruits, honey, etc.). wã himiãi.

the ground broke after sinking gradually (possibly as a result of an earthquake). a pitha re hetiriherihe, a pitha pata re rairaipraruhe ye e.

to break after sinking gradually (possibly as a result of an earthquake). hetiriherihe.

to align or tighten the straw strands of a basket (durative, plural object). shaninãmai.

the pehi that antaño were capable of escupir the princikãi to reach a living target and make it fall. pehi kãi wahepramai: peni pe the pe hãtãmai no tharaheshi (mit.

pathogens. princikãi.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

buttocks, rear end. nalwei.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the place where the child was located. ihiru pei koroku ha ha kema.

to be downstream; to be located downstream. koroo.

to make someone go to the center. tharimarei.

to gather or hold the arms over the chest. yokokokei.

put yourself in the middle of the water (or in the middle of the group, depending on the context). a ta mi ãmoparu.

to place oneself in the center of a group or in the middle of the water. ãmopariyo.

if you insist on going there, you will let yourself be killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini, wa shemoparu (mit.

to let oneself be killed at the edge of the water. shemopariyo.

to illuminate (with a flame, glowing embers waved in front, or a torch). hisikou.

undergrowth that was cut to establish a field. sotobosque que fue cortado para establecer un conuco.

clearing, field. peye.

without a doubt they are not very far away. pe ahetoimi ke the.

they are not very far away. ahetoimi.

headdress of the hekura that resembles the feline wãshãema. watoshe wãshãema.

on the path, he wants to incrust it on a rock. pei ke maki ha e the shatimai puhioherii yaro.

to incrust on a rock. puhioherii.

I will destroy your back with my axe (ceremonial dialogue). ipa fãyokorã ke ani pe kofesi yafathoprari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

metal axe. fãyokorã.

to be in a hurry. prohoro.

The anteater lay on its back to sleep. Oso hormiguero se echó de espaldas para dormir.

to lie on one. rekekeaai.

give me the object that contains my hallucinogenic substance. miha epenaye ke ki pehi kãi ta hiyo.

object that contains a hallucinogenic substance. epenaye.

as soon as I hear that, I immediately put the nock of an arrow (I'll be so furious). hei re pe wãri kutou tehe ya naka tetai re shoarayouwei.

nock of an arrow. tetarei.

to be hungry. raharu.

Why is it that the chiggers always come to lodge under the toes. weti the ha hihu na peni yare mamisi pe no hore waiaprai ayao.

It is him whom I decided to kill. ya waiamar e m a.

1. To persist; to pursue. 2. To refuse, to prohibit (e.g., telling a child not to eat a forbidden meat, telling someone not to come back, asking someone to refuse to accept something). 3. To choose a victim (human or animal predator).. waiamarei.

she woke up and left him (where he was). the wãri hoketariyowei, the wãri takeherii.

the child did not come down and he abandoned him. ihiru a ithonomi, a takeherima (mit.

to abandon someone on the way. takeherii.

to become less and less visible in the darkness. waroshoai.

he obstructed the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

to start obstructing an orifice or closing an opening. kahuprai.

to dent, to produce a concave mark on the surface of an object (by bending, hitting or crushing it). wãhihãmai.

old person. heku-pe.

old. heku-.

the ancestors were already hanging from the posts that support the base of the roof. poreri totahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waikiwe ha.

Post that supports the base of the roof at the back of a communal dwelling. Name often given to women (because their hammocks are often installed at the back of the roof).. totaﬁ.

when omãyãri stops I go ahead of him, I go ahead of the thaapraramai. omãyãri ke a ha upraoni ya no mãyo hãii mi ha paoni, ya no mãyo yai thaapraramai (cha.

Supernatural beings associated with the rainbow and epidemics; what characterizes them is bitterness. thaapraramai.

Scrape it quickly with the machete. siparani wa the ha horerehorereprarini.

to rub, scrape, clean by rubbing. horere.

they went away when it dawned. tehe mi ukekou pe hurayoma.

went away. ukekerayou.

The woman hung from a tree and, when the Tapir passed underneath, she kicked it. suweni a kahathorema (mit.

to pass underneath. pepihitou.

even though it is very far away, bring me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

distant, far away. yaheriwe.

to crouch down until being with. rasi.

1. to start swaying (an object planted in the ground), 2. to shake an object planted in the ground, to pull it out or check if it is firmly embedded, 3. to have become unsteady. hãweke.

I have my eye irritated by a foreign object. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to have a foreign object lodged between the eye and eyelid. ripupi.

to cut into many pieces. weyuweyuyoma.

to sit on leaves. fkoroku pakoheo.

to place food on leaves (put on the ground). fni pakoheai.

to put something on leaves placed on the ground. pakoheai.

squirrel monkey, or titi monkey. esheeshemi.

to have been informed correctly. shariripou.

in the proximity. ahete ha vode.

proximity. vode.

to pluck a handful of leaves; to singe the hair of an animal before gutting it. hukukai.

It got tangled in vegetation. Warawaramou.

to get tangled in vegetation. warawaramo.

Conoto was the first to be impregnated by the leg. kanapororiwe matha hapa shipenarayou no kureshi.

you were impregnated (lit. wa shipenarayoma.

to cause to become pregnant. shipenamarei.

to hang by the arms for a short time. yakukutou.

put (plural objects) in the center. mi tharimai.

to put something in the middle, in the center. tharimai.

to dilute in water; to wash with water, to purify by means of a liquid. yaru.

he prevented his mother-in-law from sleeping. pe yesi a miã shihihirimapoma.

to keep someone awake, to prevent someone from sleeping. hihirimapoma.

we went together to gather the firewood we needed (to cook) at the vaquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

to do it together (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). pathothorei.

as there is mud everywhere, I don't want to stay here. the pe ãhiãhipi ha ya kuo puhiomi ke a tharei.

mud. ãhiãhipi.

the rocky face of Mount Mashohara shines beautifully. mashoharapiwei ki pariki pata re shutukahe noshi re harirape e.

beautifully. harirape.

became round, spherical (perfective). komorekei, perf.

became round, spherical. komorekei.

(related form of yakeke). namo ka yakeke.

I got sick from the fat of the cajaro. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, I imagine very distant things. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

to lose one. wãrimarei.

that causes nausea. the pariki shi harihamai.

to cause numbness or nausea. harihiamai.

to be iridescent, shimmering. terereã.

he made love with the woman and gave her two gallinetas. suwe e na ha waakini e kipi hãshimo hipekema.

to make love. waakini.

perfective form of the factitive verb . aumomarei.

tadpole. shiotorema.

(no clear translation provided). pehiki.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. irorai.

brother, put this on your shoulder. ãi, ei the ta rukere, the ta yerere.

to put on one. yererei.

the women will see the neck of the calabash covered with white down. ke pe wãrini shokãtãma ke kahiki horoi mii totiinmediatamente.

covered with white down. fhoroi.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to reflect. piyekeri.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it. koã ãsho tikukai.

to position oneself at an appropriate distance. ware pe tikukua.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it, to scatter, to spread out, to position oneself at an appropriate distance (neither too close nor too far). tikukai.

he grabbed the head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break into several pieces. huhetimai.

the girl that they raptured when they attacked us, they certainly carry her (on their back). suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

they raptured. shurukuuhe.

to bend the edge of an instrument when striking too hard a surface (generally good steel breaks, poor quality steel bends and twists). tishikimãi.

to be isolated again. yawerai.

to bend or curve under a weight (for a person). thorukuo.

fruit that can be harvested with a pole. rekamou.

it was because I defended myself alone that I am still alive. kamiye re ya nohi ha peyeoni ya rii t e m i.

to defend oneself. peyerayou.

ceremonial dialogue. tetetewe.

to make an object dry. washitiamai.

despite everything I slipped underneath the cut trees. kayapa hiki mohe re yoare hami ya hirerea he yatikema.

to slip, to slide underneath. hirere.

my hands regularly go numb. ya imiki puhi mratamratamou.

to regularly go numb, to have a body part that regularly goes numb. mratimratimou.

the rapasimi fish are full of spines. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

the woman was very beautiful and Rabipelado made love to her during the night. riyehewe heparohowe a suwe kuoma, kama ke iha nãroriwe a wamou he haruma.

full of spines, spiny. heparohowe.

dried and hardened without rotting (a dead log). ãmãrokorãyou.

the mount Morãmãnã that rises near here, who lives (lit. hei morãmãnã ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi kothe ha weti ke a wãri roa.

mountain. morãmãnã.

to strike with the foot during a fight (a bird). kakekeai.

Jaguar took another path and made a long detour. ãyoyo shomi ke yoka ha ira ke a pata ãyoãtaroma.

to make a long detour. ãyoãtaroma.

they hide (in the forest) their hammocks made of vines. thoo thotho pe ropramaihe.

to hide objects in the forest; to make several trips to hide objects in the forest. ropraamai.

he killed two paujíes one after the other. paru- horokoto ri a horohoprarema.

to kill two animals or two enemies during the same expedition. horohoprai.

to heat, to reheat; to rise, to get up. yota.

to perforate, to make holes (durative 1). wareshai.

to put oneself underneath something, to go underneath. pepiai.

to be about to widen progressively towards the edge. eheteprai.

if you come to knock me down, I will repel you and crush your nose by striking it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to crush or flatten by striking with a stick. yatikai.

to pursue, to reach someone. nosi huriai.

reached someone at a specific place (perfective). nosi hurikei.

reached (perfective, plural subject). nosi huriokei.

reached (perfective of the inceptive). nosi hurirei.

to pursue, to reach. huriai.

because of tobacco I have lost my strength. naheni ya moyepitariyoma.

to lose one. moyepitariyoma.

follow me, you will capture a small váquiro (= you will kill an enemy). ware ke wa ihirupi huweape, a nosi ta yauiku.

to catch, capture, seize, take possession of (a single object). weape.

to bruise in several places. wãokoprou.

to abandon definitively a task before completing it. waikiprou.

to brace oneself on one's feet (to make an effort). mamiki hitatao.

to become stiff, to contract (to make an effort). hitatatou.

to be in a state of constant movement. tirotiromo.

we went to look for leaves, each one by their side. yama hena pe ha thaapotuni haye ya e hena ki omarema.

go hunt paujies (each one by their side). paruri ke a ta niyaapotuhe.

each one by their side. thaapotuni.

the father of Tucán came to take Kasima as a wife. mayepirithaweni pe hiini kasimi a tea mi parema.

to take a woman (for seduction or marriage). mayepirithaweni.

to have erect and firm breasts. fhãkãmiki shererewe.

to be erect, firm (referring to breasts). sherere.

has. tiene.

in an instant we went to get wood, then I quickly went to gather the leaves (that I needed to cover the roof of my shelter). yetu yama the ãshope ha pathothani, yetu yãã re ya henaki perema.

to work together; to exchange goods (during a trade). pathothani.

Espíritu-luna se elevaba, y las flechas no llegaban hasta él. periporiwe a ha isirini pe shereka hawepraai yaioma.

yo me levanto. ya i s i h e r i i.

to rise, grow, sprout (a plant). isirini.

he buried his nails in the top of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei (mit.

top of the skull. kepeiwei.

we started working, we built the temporary shelter. yamaki kea shoakema, yama nahi thai shoapema.

to start working, to attack. kei.

when the sun began to decline, the Sloth Spirit (Baba) returned home. wãrishewe, mothoka kaiprou tehe, a wãri koã kopema (mit.

the lazy one, the sloth spirit. ihamariwe.

to have bulging eyes (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). mamoku si yeheye.

They looked for them, but since there were no marks of their steps, they stopped. the pe taeo ma kui, the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

to have a footprint (the ground). yãshiki.

to be angry. katosihi.

he woke up at the moment when day was breaking. the haruu uheheprou tehe a rãrãyoma.

to pass from night to day, to begin (the day). uheheprou.

Siroromi crushed his body completely, and when he had finished he stuck his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

to crush or grind completely. hititirarini.

to inhale a hallucinogen. rawahawe.

objects hung tightly together. t hãrokoprawe , pl.

to be hung tightly together. rukeke.

they took a long time to find the case (that contained the feathers for adornment). yãkumi kanapo si tararemahe.

after a long time, his legs became short and bent, he came out painfully and returned home. yãkumi the mamiki yerea ha totihiarini, yãkumi re a ha harini a kopema.

for a long time. yãkumi.

to improve the state of a sick person. wakakamarei.

to have milk (woman). suhemoprou.

I let go of the child. ihiru ya hayoai.

to detach, to loosen, to pull out. hayoo.

the cambures (fruits) are crushed under the weight. tate ke ki nahihou.

to crush, to crumble, to break into pieces. ihip.

the rain is heard close by here. maa a hoã titetewe.

to be close, to be near. titetea.

to make a bamboo arrowhead too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakororei.

he did not delay in reaching the path of Aparecido, then he walked on a plain. pore re a no mayo hami yeture e he hapraoma, a he yaripekir i o m a.

to walk on a plain. he yari.

to eat a food by cutting it with the incisors, to eat a cambur in that way. weheriai.

I am hungry. kumiti nouku.

to be hungry. kumiti.

I untangled the bow (caught in the vegetation). hãto re ya nahi hayurema.

bow. hãto.

get up early to go kill an enemy (lit. pei waheki rãmi henarayou, waheki ha henarini poshe wãro wahe a niyaprarei.

early morning, dawn. henarini.

to scratch once. hukekai.

to stick out the tongue. tepa.

to give a small amount of something. isipikei.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

let them (the hekura) come who put bird feathers in the lobe of their ears. pe no koikoimipi hena huuhou ta kuikiyo.

to come, to advance towards. kuikiyo.

to widen a little. uhehãi.

the water eroded the soil all around (and made it collapse). ma pe hishiatarama.

1. To collapse, crumble, erode. 2. To make something collapse or crumble; to excavate to enlarge a burrow. 3. High riverbank carved by the current.. hishi.

on the other side Tilingo multibandeado in turn enlarged the cavity of the rock (myth). ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

mythological ancestor; hekura associated with the Tilingo multibandeado (Pteroglossus pluricinctus) toucan. piremarithawe.

(racimos) pender. yarorai.

to hang, to dangle. yaroro.

insists on the act. pasurei.

you will not make me be killed by the hekura. yare pesi yehiai mai ke the (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to make someone be killed by the hekura (during a ceremonial speech). koiai.

we progressed slowly downstream, one after another. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

one after another. hirihãi.

put your two hands there (to receive it), it is a male (that is being born). pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke a hoã.

to peel yopo grains, to scratch oneself, to put one. iprushia.

they cut off the jaguar's head. ira ke he pata pahetiprai ha kuparuheni.

head of a fierce beast to burn it and take revenge for its misdeeds. pafeti.

to receive a piece, a part. ayakosipei.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

to become white. auhou.

you have to do like the Shamathari. shamathari wa pe ha owemani.

to imitate, to do like. owemani.

the jaguar killed the dog while it launched into pursuit of a picure. hiimani thomi a nosi ha tereherini, irani a sherema.

to launch into pursuit. tereherini.

Dry stream. hashiCaño seco.

The woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now. mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma.

to dry up, to become dry. hashiti.

the foot of the tree. pei hi kothe.

at the foot of the tree. hii kothe ha.

they went around the rocky wall of the mountain at its base. pei maki kothe hami the pe ã y o r i m a.

base, foot. fkothe.

large spider. wariomi kohesi.

pelvis, hip bone. kohesi.

Jaguar dormía con la cabeza volcada. ncima ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma.

Jaguar. ncima.

manner of saying that one shares the food of others (lit. fware a ni hoã re oore.

enemy warrior. fware.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

buttocks, rear end, behind. kola.

we have surrounded the collective dwelling. shapono yama a he hithorokopema.

To construct a dwelling with a circular roof in one piece; To fence, surround a dwelling or a person. ithorokomapei.

to become a little deep. ayaraai.

shake a tobacco leaf to remove the ash when preparing a quid. yomikiprai (sacudir una hoja de tabaco para quitarle la ceniza cuando se prepara una mascada).

shake an object held at the tip of the fingers. yomikiprai.

to be unstable, to wobble, to move or roll under the feet. kapuruo.

soon it became night and they cut firewood. the he titia shorarayoma, koã ãsho poai re shoarariyouwehei.

it became night. shorarayoma.

then, what is happening to them (where they are). weti naha pei wamaki kuaai kupiyewe.

to be in a certain state in a place different from the place of utterance. kupiyewe.

I descended the slope where there were foul-smelling (dead, rotting) cows. ware pe ni ithãri re hiraowei hami ya mi re weteparekiriowei.

to descend, to go down an inclined plane. hiraowei.

the tembladors gave me several shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador (electric eel). tihekira2.

to be happy. tihoho.

you will transport the blood in the pot (making several round trips). hapoka si ha wa kore pe teaprarei.

blood clot. korekore.

the cries of Woman-picumonãmãriwe went far away. Yãri yaherikeherima (mit.

Woman-picumonãmãriwe. yãri.

the raw caterpillars were (arranged) above, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached the bottom (of the package). heaka ha kasha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to be full to the brim, to be about to overflow (for a watercourse); to reach a certain limit (for an object). manikipraw.

to be a little strong (noise), pungent or acrid. fnakehe.

they asked him to accompany them when they were going to a momo fruit feast organized by the souls. no porepi ke peni momo ke a ha the pe shoaihe tehe, a nokamapomahe.

they asked him to accompany them. nokamapomahe.

to use the kinship term . suwepikei.

they will go out hunting with their dogs, and they will eat meat. wamaki yaropi wãri krothakrothamope: shemani.

they will eat. shemani.

without a doubt he will give it as a gift. a no hipekepi.

he will give it as a gift. hipekepi.

to be slightly greasy (body of a living being). shãrokoai.

we regrouped and plunged down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to fall or slide down a slope, to plunge into water. nihorokei.

to have been perforated in several places (resultative state). wareshano.

immediately she insulted him, she insulted that young man (myth). e mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma (mit.

she insulted him. mãririãprarou.

to close the eyes for a moment. misi mikei.

not to be locally cleared or bare (ground). noshi tãihiã.

to have gotten a cough/cold. thokopirayou.

to do this for a moment. imiprao.

the tobacco pouch is on the handle of the stone axe. poo hetho hami pee nahe rukea kure.

to be hooked, to be hung, to be placed in balance on; to be inserted in a cavity. rukea.

mode of locomotion of reptiles. ethethou.

to become non-linear, to bend, to curve, to become winding (often referring to an arrow). ethethe.

They got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

To get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people). weyoyoprou.

they wear old worn-out loincloths. wayuko yãpishipi pe rapouhe.

to deteriorate (a fabric). yãpishiprou.

we advanced slowly one after the other. opi pemaki re hirihoheriiwei.

we advanced slowly one after the other. hirihoheriiwei.

they advanced putting their hands in the crab holes. oko eyoshi ha the imiki rukeataroma.

hole, cavity at the edge of the water, or in the submerged part of the shore, where certain animals live. eyoshi.

I'm not saying that I'm going to organize only this funeral ceremony. yãmi ke ya hesi komi koãmai totihio, ya kuu mai.

to make someone consume the ashes of a dead person, to organize a funeral ceremony during which the powdered bones of a dead person are ingested mixed with a banana compote. koãmarei.

it hurts him/her. mamiki yutukuai.

to hurt. yutuku.

yellow or brown in color. ashiashi.

to make several lines with objects. shaniniakei.

reach the place where we have gone to hunt and kill the tapirs. hei koro ha pemaki ta henimoprei hami, wamaki ha hur oherini, ware ki ta niyaprari.

that is where they intend to go for a prolonged hunt. kiha pe pe niya heniyomou kuprei.

to go for a prolonged hunt. henimoprei.

I have given them all. ya the pe hititikema.

I have given them all. hititikema.

to stumble, to falter (from the effect of a load). tihop r a o.

to sink, to crumble, to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihop.

they do not inform me. yare nowã thapouimihe.

they do not inform me. thapouimihe.

the big worms were tapping against the wall. horema ke the pe pata hipihipipraroma.

I'm going to poke your eye. pe mamo hipipei.

to probe by tapping, to tap repeatedly with an elongated object. hipihipimai.

in each occasion the ancestors used to let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

they used to let escape. tokupraamanowehei.

to fill; to make someone eat until satiated. petimai.

stingray. shipari.

noise of a fart when the buttocks are wet. praririmou.

to pleat (terminative). wãhiprou.

they paint their bodies and put white down on their heads. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to be putting white down on one. horoimamou.

(it) acquires that color. mishi teãpiprou.

to acquire that color. teãpiprou.

to extinguish a fire. koa wake sheteke.

to lure into a trap, to invite people to a party in order to kill them and/or take their women. nomohorimou.

to knock against each other (speaking of the sedge skirts tied to the women. tiritirimou.

as he was blind, they transported him in his hammock. a huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki ha.

blind. huperipi.

to begin to become beautiful. riyeheai.

the burning breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

to spread out suddenly, to make oneself heard unexpectedly. pakayuprao.

to become sparse, to thin out. shororo.

to become dense. tupi-.

to keep the bowstring taut at the heel of an arrow (perfective). shereka naka tipetarei.

to keep the bowstring taut at the heel of an arrow. mapou.

it becomes less dense, it becomes thinner, it clears (low vegetation). noshi takakaai.

to become less dense, to become thinner, to clear (low vegetation). takakaai.

to be happy. hãhihi.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokomari.

to wet intentionally. hereprai.

to begin to do something. heikiprai.

when one is a neighbor and has avenged the dead, there is no need to threaten each other again (if one really does not want to go to war). ei naha the pe hiimapi toayou ahetou mi hetutou ha, wã teteo kotãotihehe.

to threaten each other again. kotãotihehe.

little one, open your mouth. shei, kahiki ta rereparu.

term of address for a younger son or brother (of either sex). shei.

to breathe rapidly, to pant. ferefere.

to be inferior to, to be shorter than. fawe.

impure red (red mixed with other shades). wake puhi ikihiwe.

1. to be on the verge of tears, 2. a mixed color, not pure. ikihiwe.

to acquire reflections, to acquire this tonality locally, to dye or paint yellow, to dye or paint something with a yellowish annatto, to have this tone locally, to have been painted locally with a yellowish color, or to be stained by smoke. frãihiãi.

after the snake bit me while I was hunting, I had memory lapses. yahi hami ya koprou he yatirayoma, ya puhi mratamratamou ha shoaparuni.

1. To have memory lapses; to lose consciousness for moments (after an illness, snake bite). puhi mratamratamou.

to expand, enlarge, spread out (durative, plural object). presenmai.

to those paujíes with red butts perched there, they want to skin their crests. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

crest and neck skin of a bird (paují). mãruki.

it is all stained with dirt, the fire has stained it. the pe pata tepepishi, wa the auprarini.

it is all stained with dirt. auprarini.

bejuco; Tynnanthus polyanthus (Bignoniaceae). hayahaya.

this has the smell of a capuchin monkey. the ni kurisipisini.

to have a characteristic smell/odor. pisini.

to arm the bow to shoot an arrow. shereka maketai.

to introduce an arrow into the bowstring to shoot it. pehi makeprai o pehi maketai.

to arm the bow to shoot an arrow. maketai.

to soften, to loosen, to make flexible by moistening. homarei.

come little one, lick my fingers. hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape.

to lick. nako.

to be wider than. hetore.

Iewe brought cassava (to offer upon arrival). ieweni nashi hiki re perakeherayouwei.

the place of the statement, or place of reference, is different from the place where the action takes place. fkeherayo.

to make dirty, to make covered in mud or ashes. toteshiamai.

to have slid down (perfective of the inchoative). yohorayou.

brother-in-law, represent things clearly, when you achieve it, manifest your anger. shoriwe a puhi ta wararaparu, wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

to represent clearly, to recall perfectly. wararapariyo.

to hang low, to hang with a long rope. preyukuprou.

cut the vine (in two). thoo thotho ta peprari.

I harvested leaves counting them (the petiole). yãã ya henaki perema.

they chopped off the jaguar's head. ira pe he kãi peremahe (mit.

cut, chop off a piece of something (long object, applying blows from above downwards, or oblique). peararihe.

even though it is very far away, bring me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. yaferi.

for a fledgling to start growing its first feathers. makutupiai.

grow first feathers. makutupiai.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki.

Kãrãnãri will make you fall. kãrãnãrini wa kemarei.

supernatural being of the yai the class; kicks those who climb trees and makes them fall. kãrãnãrini.

tree with large seeds. kayoromi.

expr. foru kahiki wariyoma.

venomous snake (lit. foru ke ki yai.

little brother, don't stray from the path, watch out for snakes. oãsi, a paatihe, oru ke ki.

snake. foru.

barely red. manashi momihiwe.

red, reddish. momih.

it (the water) became muddy. u koshirayou.

to become muddy (water). koshirayou.

to divide into several groups. shererepram.

to be convinced. mirãhãpou.

I don't have any more of that. ya horiprou waiki a.

to be lacking something; to run out of something. horiprou.

animal. yeimi.

durative. durativo.

he committed a lapsus and mocked himself a lot. a aka ha hãropraruni, pruka a noka ikãoma.

to laugh mockingly, to mock by laughing. hãropraruni.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to exchange, to swap. hemihãpii.

to become sensitive to the taste of rancid butter or oxidized fats, as a consequence of violating the prohibition of consuming game meat accompanied with pijiguaos. ãsikeprou.

floury, dry inside (for firewood). kakashi.

stream, brook, minor watercourse without depth. etehemi.

to perforate, to make holes, to open an orifice in a hollow trunk, to open a package with fingers (perfective, plural of acts). horoshoakei.

if you sleep without fire you will get elephantiasis in the testicles. wa ruwemou tehe wa natheki wakapirayou.

elephantiasis in the testicles. wakapirayou.

to be strong for moments, to be alternately strong and weak (noise). nakretou.

to be about to go to get oneself painted. hirikipramou.

I'm going to throw an arrow without a tip. makasi prokeni ya pehi ta niyapraa sho.

arrow tip. prokeni.

became deep. tarokei.

The fish is in the water near the rapids (speech from the south of the Orinoco). hei iwa a wãri kãã he re ka eroro (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to be in the water, to be soaking. kãã.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the surface of water, behind clouds (celestial body). ururãi.

we are in the company of people who are not from our community, but we are the ones who tie the arrow canes in the middle (that we just collected, to transport them). kamiye yamaki re heshihiomopotayouwei, shereka ke yama peishoku pata re thaamaperei.

to be in the company of people from other communities. heshi.

he slid his hand along the strings of the hammocks. pei re the pe peki hami imiki waroroataroma.

to slide the hand or fingers along something. warorokei.

go to harvest Indian cane leaves. komishi hena ta tirire.

carry it on your back. the ta yehire.

he carried it on his back. tirire.

my older brother ordered me. apaweni ware a shimama.

my older brother ordered me. apaweni.

después de una corta ausencia, él franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda trayendo una cesta llena de frutos momo. momo ke pe pata thari ha yehireni, the horetou re korayouwei.

he franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda trayendo una cesta llena de frutos momo. korayouwei.

to break the shell of. poshoamo.

to keep horizontally (a long object), to maintain horizontal. reremapou.

they do not cease sharpening the points of their bamboo arrowheads (= they do not cease desiring to go to war). pe the ki no wãri rahaka namo thai mrapimi.

to sharpen. thaai.

as soon as she arrived she sat in the hammock next to her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

to sit in a hammock. tipepraa.

to be crumbled, crumbled state. hashishia.

corre hacia mí primero. heyemi ke a ta rereo pariokipiyoru.

come towards me first. pariokipiyoru.

dead and hard wood; wood that does not rot. amahi.

the girl who had her first period, and who was isolated behind the menstrual hut leaves, came out without anyone noticing. yipi re henaki hishomi ha ai re a suwe re yipimouwei, a haa hãthorema.

menstrual hut. hãthorema.

to wag the tail (dog). yaweyawemou.

on top there were raw caterpillars, and underneath were the others, twisted from cooking. heaka hami kasha riye pe re me un ovillo de algodón.

to be at the bottom, to be underneath. kohomoo.

he/she/it did it locally (sense 2). hirikirei.

the baby does not let others hold it. ihiru a noshi imão.

because you refuse to give white people's goods. nape ke wa matohipi noshi imapou ha.

to refuse, reject, not want. imã.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

I say frankly what I think. yãomi.

Bat went to stick (along a tree trunk). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

to become sticky, gooey. sutiai.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short stick. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short stick. horotoweni.

the one who habitually performs the action indicated by the verbal root. RVremi.

to do something among several people. hetutuprai.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw mucus). fhushihipi.

to stick abruptly to the ground. resiprakei.

to flatten multiple objects. resisamai.

extend your hands (so that I can give you something). imiki ta poshokoiku.

to extend the hands cupped to receive something. poshokoo.

to grow, to fatten up until reaching a medium size; to go from a large size to a medium size, to reduce in that way. proweheai.

to be completely visible. waehewe.

speak of river upstream. eﬁere el ocumo.

speak. eﬁere.

I carry the logs in my arms. koã ya ãsho rerepou.

to carry long objects in both arms against the chest. rerepou.

he palpated it several times and then said: "it's an old man". a ha huperarini: "pata ke the", e kuma.

to touch different places, to feel around, to palpate. huperarei.

to reach or hit someone. retiweheparei.

give me a bamboo arrowhead, place it on the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to take from someone an object that they obtained from another. torerei.

(if I do that) I will get thorns stuck (in the flesh). ya misikipirariyo.

to get thorns or spines stuck in the flesh. mimisi.

go to repeat what you heard. a wãno ta weiku.

Yaowe, big testicles, said: "I will be the first to repeat what I have seen (or heard)". yoawe nathekiwe ke: "kamiye ke ya wã no weo pariotayou".

he/she/it. e.

to paint a sinuous or broken line on someone's face. mi eyekeai.

to paint a sinuous or broken line on someone. mi eyekeai.

having steadied oneself on one. kayeria.

Prueheyoma (them) cursed them immediately. prueheyoma a hirai shoaoma.

1. The hallucinogenic substance itself. 2. To scold, argue, curse.. hirai.

1. hetoshi: 1. To be worn out, frayed, damaged (a rope, a cord, a strap). Estar gastado, deshilachado, raído o dañado (una cuerda, un cordel, una correa). It is also said of a fruit that has lost its skin after friction. Se dice también de una fruta que ha perdido su envoltura después de una fricción. 2. 2. To be dirty with earth (southern Orinoco speech). Estar sucio de tierra (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to deteriorate, fray (lace, strap), wear out. hetoshiai, inc.

worn out, frayed, damaged. hetoshi.

to roll over itself (an object). yapuru.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

let's put forked branches at the tips of our arrows (for hunting small birds). rãhãrã pema pe ta hiima.

squat down and put curare tips on your arrows. miha a rii ta yereiku, ahe namoku ta hiima.

to fix at the tip (by tying, nailing, etc.): to tie a hook to the end of a fishing rod, to put a point on an arrow, etc.. hiihiã.

it was no use for the child to extend the tobacco to him, he acted as if he did not see anything. ihiruni pee nahe ma totopou tehe, a wãri re mohotutionowei.

to be extending an object to give it to someone. totopou.

crouch over there, I crouch over here. miha ke a ta yereiku, kiha kamiye ke ya yereo.

to crouch, to curl up, to carry something in bent arms against the chest. yereai.

to make love (said by a male speaker). yeriyerimou.

a mythological figure who stole fire and is the owner of fire. simConoto.

to threaten with a gesture (in earnest or in play). nakuyeprai.

wild plant (unidentified); cultivated plant, lairén; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). popoa.

tree. unahi.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood erect, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

to stand erect, be upright (e.g. rocks). upraha.

he advanced calling out. a komii kuaaherima.

after resting completely, he began to call out again. a wãshimi horua ha haikitaaruni, a komii kooma.

to call out, to shout. komii.

I spoke with those who live intermingled with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pē rē koyokaiwei, ya pē now thaa shoarei kurei.

to be intermingled, to be mixed with people from another or various communities. koyokoo.

he came, left a termite nest on the ground, and went back to look for another. ai e koko ha prakiherini, ai ke e koko yuai mi hua re korayonow e i.

other, different. prakiherini.

"what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me". kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by exerting lateral pressure with the hand). yorarei.

to shake the hand once to get rid of something, to shake the hand once to splash someone or something, to vigorously shake an object held with the fingertips to remove something from it (especially to remove excess ash from tobacco leaves when preparing a chew). yomisãi.

pasar y volver. weyoyoweyoyomou.

to pass and return. weyoyo.

upriver (speaking of upriver). kai ãsho (habla de río arriba.

upriver. kai.

the knot of the bowstring slid along its anchor point (and came undone). pe nahitha moroshi ikukuprariyoma.

to slide a knot along its anchor point, or an object along its support. ikukuprai.

to kill. shei.

the ghosts were frightened and suddenly disappeared. porepore ke pe ha kiriraruni pei ke the pe mratou ha peroherini.

they died. mrarariyo.

when all the palms of the same place have the clusters on the lower part of the trunk. fuerikrekeprawe.

the child, who was clever, passed (from the basket where he was) to a tree and stayed perched there. keo heoma (mit.

child. keo.

sin. aititi.

to sway in a hammock. kayeri.

to sway. kayeri.

to crumble, to collapse, to disintegrate. hashishiai.

smoke rising inside a dwelling. koa wake shi poyakaai.

smoke rising inside a dwelling. poyakaai.

again the woman described a curve. suwe e naha ke a tihiyea kuprou ha koroni.

curve. kuprou.

he ate the man accompanying him with casabe. nashi re ﬁki ha yãnomãmi a teﬁai fa kuponi.

to accompany (food). teﬁai.

to fix the feathering of several arrows. shereka he haomai.

to fix the feathering on arrows (durative, plural object). haomai.

bring here (on the back) a skin of the tangará bird (of the hehehemi species) from the Waika. waika hehehemi e siki ta yehimaparihe.

bring (transporting on the back). yehimapa.

I am afraid. hapapa si.

to be afraid. hapapa.

then we climbed the slope, and when we had stopped at the top (of the mountain), the wind suddenly ceased. yamaki yãmoã ha mahitaikuhuruni, hesika ha yamaki uprahatou tehe watori a matha kãi re waitariyowei.

we stopped for a good while at the top (of the mountain). ahataoma.

types. yatintos.

to be completely hidden behind or underneath something. shãhoprawe.

to drip (blood). iyepe rukekou.

to drip (blood). rukekou.

they had built the camp, and they went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one by which they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a beast that was pursuing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to exceed (in quantity, in length), to go beyond (a limit), to leave behind. torerayoma.

he conversed in a soft voice. a wã wãhãniniwe wayoma.

to be very soft (voice, noise). wãhãniniwe.

well. bien.

to press, to squeeze. hisini.

upstream. krake.

in two. en dos.

platanal. ara.

now my arrows get caught in the lianas, that is what I will say (= now I am old and my arrows get entangled in the lianas. hei tehe pe ki sherekaye hãrokãi, ya kãi kupe.

to get entangled with lianas, to get caught in vegetation; to be attached (figurative sense). hãrokãi.

they are many, standing one next to the other, with the head covered with white down. pe he horoi yorukuwe (mit.

to sprout in large quantities (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). yorukurayou.

to cry for a child. puhi kãi hãkihiãi.

to cry for someone. hãkihiãi.

we lived by the river, it was then that they began to detest us. para ke u ha wamare nohi wãrirema.

since I detest them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

the others observed the ripe cambures and asked "what is this. ai peni tate pe ha tararini, pe wãrima, "weti pei ke the ki rii. ". ".

to feel resentment towards someone, to protest, to react to an unpleasant situation, to defend oneself during an altercation, to ask a question, to request information. wãrirei.

he is a man of mature age, one of those shamans who regularly inhale hallucinogens. pata ke a, prowehewe eoko (habla del sur del Orinoco.

age. edad.

the two women lay down immediately next to each other in the hammock. thoo ke thoku ha suwe ke kipi parekea mi hetutua shoakema.

to place side by side, to lie next to. pareke.

to be locally wrinkled, flabby or soft. wãpreteã.

to clean or paint several objects white. aushimararei.

to surround quickly. hãyotou.

he has had a fixed gaze for a while. a mamoku royokotio.

the stars do not twinkle. shitikari pe mamoku pata royokoprawe.

to have a fixed gaze. royokotio.

we lived by the river, it was then that they began to detest us. para ke u ha wamare nohi wãrirema.

since I detest them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

the others observed the ripe cambures and asked "what is this. ai peni tate pe ha tararini, pe wãrima, "weti pei ke the ki rii. ". ".

to feel resentment towards someone, to protest, to react to an unpleasant situation, to defend oneself during an altercation, to ask a question, to request information. wãrirei.

tamandua (anteater). okro.

to feel fear (for oneself). nohi horihio.

to feel fear (for oneself). horihio.

to be folded or rolled up once, to be partially rolled up. wapure.

with the reahu other different rituals are usually celebrated. con el reahu se celebran habitualmente otros rituales diferentes.

banquet. reahu.

I got lost. ya mohorurayom a.

I got lost. mohorurayom.

they draw intersecting lines. shereka a yahecruzan.

to cross, to cut transversely; to draw intersecting lines. yahecruzan.

to peel the seeds of the yopo plant. prushi.

don't be afraid, wait a moment and let's talk. peheki ã ta wayo: no temas nada, espera un momento y conversemos.

to converse, to talk. wayo.

belonging to the taxonomy of animals and plants. taxowe.

al venir aquí hice un rodeo para evitar a la gente Arimawe. ãrimawe theri ke iha ya e ma re ãyoikiyohe.

to make a detour to avoid something. ãyoikiyohe.

to make a ball with an object to wrap it. pushukuprai.

of the five levels that make up the Yanomami cosmos, two bear this name. hetu misi wãro pata: de los cinco niveles que componen el cosmos yãnomãmi dos llevan este nombre. One is the ground, that is, the level occupied by human beings. Uno es el suelo, es decir el nivel ocupado por los seres humanos. The other is the level immediately below, where the amahiri live. El otro es el nivel inmediatamente inferior, donde viven los amahiri.

one of the five levels of the Yanomami cosmos. hetu misi wãro pata.

the hekura shot arrows at the daughter of the yawari people. taritari ke peni yãwãriyoma pe teepi a niyamahe.

another name for the hekura (a Yanomami spirit or being). taritari.

Yoreriyoma (= Mujer-hongo) mourned her son and lamented. yoreriyoma pe ihirupi a no miã poma.

whom are you crying for. weti ke wa the no miã pou.

to cry for a dead person or pet, to mourn and express it by crying; to lament. ãmoãmo.

to have the custom of offering boiled bananas to others. frokomi ãsiki weyepou.

banana. frokomi.

sostienen el techo de la casa de los antepasados. the ki rahakapi makekeprarou yaioma.

ancestors. rahakapi.

my scalp hurts from the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to come to feel a painful sensation due to an irritation or superficial wound. hushiai.

he introduced his penis and copulated (lit. the mo wãri rukerani, a wãri wãekewãekemoma.

to penetrate, to introduce into a cavity. rukerani.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami passed by one after the other (carried by the current). motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma.

to be partially emptied or filled. hayaroo.

to plan to do everything. ya niaata hasen.

to plan to do something (sleep, urinate, defecate, etc.). hasen.

(upriver speech) I had warned him, unfortunately he insisted on it. ya wã ma fai tehe kama re the fe prakekou tikoo kuhe.

to insist on saying something, to be stubborn. prakehe.

I cover my eyes. mi kehuo.

to cover one. kehu.

upriver speech. kai hesi.

lightning, thunderbolt. thãhimi.

to shrink, reduce. horotai.

(no translation provided). ku-piye-i.

the stars shine. shitikari pe hiwatuwe.

thanks to the moonlight, it is bright. peripo shni the hiwatuwe.

to be naturally bright or luminous. hiwatuwe.

to have a slip of the tongue, to use one word for another. hãroprariyo.

to run across a footbridge over a stream. rerepariyo.

to shave someone. mãroskoshi.

during the displacement the men mixed with the women (to protect them). suwe pe rii hami wãro ke the komi re nikererayoma.

to mix or join with people from another community (due to a special circumstance). ninioni.

there where the water is deep. u hamo kuope ha.

deep water. u hamo.

"I tore the cloth, I brought you a strip of cloth in a longitudinal direction", tell me that. "ya siki sheriria aheterema, ya siki kãi re horepohe", ware nowã ta thari.

in a longitudinal direction. horepohe.

to be full of veins/arteries/nerves. mãthoyãhipi.

vein, artery; nerve. mãthoyãhi.

I will prick up my ears to listen and name without mistake the regions inhabited by human beings. yimikaki ha asheparuni, yãnomãmi the ki re pauna yekei, ya e the ki urihipi ãhã ta katita.

to listen attentively, to prick up one. yekei.

to be distended. prihãwe.

(habla de río arriba. osheanariwe a iriamou mrai a re tapareiwehei.

los okã se apoderarán de la huella de tu paso. okrã peni wa mãyo re yurareiwehei.

la chiquilla que ellos raptaron cuando nos atacaron, la llevan ciertamente (sobre la espalda). suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

(mit. pe pruka roa ma kupe fãifãiyomiriwe a re tareiwehei.

It appears in various contexts, but no clear translation is provided.. reiwehei.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to order, to request a favor (for oneself). nosiyemorãyou.

while Oso hormiguero danced around behind, the woman returned directly to her house. teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe poreporeriyoma a katitia re korayoheriiwei.

she returned directly. poreporeriyoma.

a woman had her head cut off, and her head rolled and followed her husband everywhere. suwe ke the he hãniprou ha kuparuni, pe heãropi ke ihami pei ke the he pruruu nosi yauai ha yaioni.

to cut one. hãniprou.

to have one. haotokei.

to burn a magical substance near an enemy. yayorayou.

to think about something else. shomiprou.

that is the reason why I do not want to die. yaro kahiki re keonowei the yãno pe si ahi nikerei.

I do not want. keonowei.

to stick, adhere (food during cooking). sutipei.

don't believe that I will stay to live with you, no, I'm going somewhere else. heha a periope tao, wahe nohi thapotihe, shomi hami ya h u u.

believe, think, say something about someone. periope.

if their expedition is successful, that is if they kill someone, they undergo the unokaimou ritual. unokaimou.

ritual. unokaimou.

will he start to smile finally. pe kasi watea ke a ta kuhani.

to smile. kuhani.

en cada lugar donde él se había secado el pene sangrante en los árboles había dejado líneas (rojas) marcadas. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami hiki tiprutuwe.

penis. hãhiope.

that is downstream. koro ha the kuakirioa.

at the foot of the arrow canes of the Yawari passes the path of the jaguar village. yawari pe sherekapi si koro hami irari pe no mãyo pata re wãkirãkiri (cha.

downstream, downriver. koro.

to cause to be satiated. tikrohopramai.

they mistook a nutria for a babilla and attacked it with their bows. proro a ma kui ha, iwa a hore ha puhiheni, a tiwehamahe.

they mistook it for something else and attacked it. tiwehamahe.

association of -mo- with the perfective -pariy or -pariyo, always associated with an intransitive verb and usually referring to actions or acts performed in water. -moparu.

exult, rejoice. yokei.

the arrow broke when it hit something. ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei, thoku kakiprariyoma.

to break into two pieces. hekiprariyo.

the váquiros (animals) are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were numerous rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothothowe.

while Bear was going around in circles behind, the woman went back home taking the most direct path. teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe, poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriiwei.

to go directly to someone/somewhere. katitio.

The wasp hangs its nest from the branches of trees; its sting is very painful. Yaitakarawe nohiriwe pe pe yawake.

wasp (unidentified species). yaitakarawe.

flat and bony part of the chest, where the ribs meet; to have protruding ribs (to be thin). fpariki yãririwe.

Mujeroso hormiguero, cuyos pelos del pubis se veían incluso cuando estaba de espaldas (por ser tan abundantes y largos), era su suegra. hapramonowei.

Murciélago fue a pegarse (a lo largo de un tronco de árbol). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

to stick, attach, adhere (a single object). sutikei.

he/she has a cramp. t shi totatotawe.

to have a cramp. totatotawe.

they are really pijiguaos of the light-colored variety. rasha auaurimi pe ma re kui.

a variety of pijiguao (peach palm fruit) that is less red than others. auaurimi.

come to get us. wamare ta koreyo.

they began to detest us. wamare nohi wãrirema.

us. wamare.

to scream in pain. wãno wayuprou.

to scream in pain. wayuprou.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it. koã ãsho tikukai.

to position oneself at an appropriate distance. ware pe tikukua.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it, to scatter, to spread out, to position oneself at an appropriate distance (neither too close nor too far). tikukai.

who has wanted to kill us then. weti ke pe ihirupi wãri perihiweni wa ãhuku kãi niya thai ta kutuhe.

to kill. kutuhe.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered with longitudinal lines. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to have a longitudinal line, a scratch. shetitia.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks (and abandon the camp) while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe.

to push away, reject with the hands (once); to reject an evil being, keep it at a distance. hirurua.

they transformed into peremiraba and I saw that they were aiming their arrows at us. rahaka re pe ki re puhuruoperei: rariyoma (mit.

bamboo arrow tips. peremiraba.

Plural of wapu. Pl.

wapu hu naki: flowers of the wapu kohi tree. wapu hu naki: ﬂores del árbol wapu kohi.

to eat them. wapu.

come honey and also it can be The word 'puu' in Yanomami means 'honey'. puu upe ta wari.

(no clear translation provided). puu.

small earthen vessel. comaki.

what a thick penis that was. wai ta preonowe.

to be thick or dense (like flour). onawe.

to shoot arrows one after the other. ehimopraai.

everywhere the measles epidemic was decimating/making the Yanomami disappear. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

currently everywhere people are in scarcity. hei tehe pe the pe oheo totihiomopotayou.

they were disappearing/dying everywhere (due to an epidemic). totihiomopotayoma.

probably the herd of tapirs is not very far away. ware keki aheare ke the.

to be close. ahea.

to cover the ground (fruits). poshoshowe.

to start to grow. primomo.

To oppose it with a rigid and elongated object by stepping on it, to split an arrow in that way. Oponérselo un objeto rígido y alargado pisándolo, partir una ﬂecha de esa manera.

to oppose it. oponérselo.

to make war. ohemayou.

they shot arrows at him. a nini tharemahe.

to shoot arrows at someone. tharemahe.

go away. vayas.

to be afraid. kotorihipe.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani (mit.

to start shaking (something). rupukuprai.

snake (unidentified). komomorema.

Wake up and make arrowheads (to go to war). wa rii ha rãrini ãhi teshi ta thapa.

(name). ãhi.

to refer to an unknown woman (whose exact kinship is unknown). suwepimou.

to tear off a portion of a round object for oneself. hahathorei.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe pei e fama fuma.

Yoroporiwe went to visit them (the two) at their house. kama ke kipi iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

to visit. yoroporiwe.

how abundant the tapir tracks could be. are pe mãyo heherama.

to exaggerate, to boast (about one. heherama.

to arrive after another person at a dwelling or camp. notipei.

be constantly verbally attacking people or hitting one. keprao.

to cut transversely in two an elongated object; to paint or draw a line across an elongated object. hahetiprai.

to form several separate groups. rãikiprawe.

it is our (of us two) conuco. kamiye peheki hikaripi theka.

it is our (of us two) house. kamiye peheki yãnopi.

our (of us two). peheki.

to tear off a portion of a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hihatho.

to be about to have someone paint part of one. shopohopramou.

shallow water. u res i.

they were splashing each other and dunking each other's heads under water. the ki hamishayou ha the ki mohe kaoayoma.

they stayed in the house to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou heama.

to do something reciprocally with each other. niyayou.

to hook or hang something using a flexible, elongated object. ishakorei.

don't hurry to go back. koo haiotihe.

don. haiotihe.

we go in the same direction as the váquiros. ware ke ki mi re kuahare hami pemaki mi kuaai mi hetua.

to go in the same direction, to follow. hetua.

the blue body of Yãmonãmãriwe did not take long to swell. yãmonãmãriwe yetu ke a pata hãepotopi hããi ha kuparuni.

to swell, to inflate, to dilate. hããprou.

había cuchillos, pero los dos niños los dañaron y ya no hay más. kushiyo re pe kuo ma kui, ihiru re ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

destroy, damage (perfective, plural object). wãriãrãrei.

(mit. yeture e the mi pata titi yopramai ha shoaroherini.

to spread out, to unfold, to deploy. yopramai.

to be hungry, to have an empty stomach. heheprao.

my father wanted to smoke fish. hayeni yuri the pe hemai shi topraoma.

1. Synonym of heamai. 2. To leave, to abandon something or someone somewhere. hemai.

to put in a container or cavity (plural object). titiprawe.

to brace oneself with the feet (to make an effort). mamiki hitatao.

to brace oneself with the feet (to make an effort). hitatao.

she was going from one side to the other and her laughter was always heard moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

stay still (or else, you'll see what happens). pe he ta reshipro (antífrasis).

to go from one side to another, not to stay still. reshiproma.

we had just grouped together to live together when we entered into war with the inhabitants of Maiyo. pemaki hapa komi hirao tehe maiyo theri pe sho pemaki niyayoma.

to live together. niyayoma.

the woman kept sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. suwe ke a mi hore wãheãpraroma, yii ke ki ha a he yohoapraroma.

to have a sunken belly, to be hungry. wãheo.

when I was young I used to offer many objects (= I was generous). matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

many. hipei.

if you sleep without fire, you will get elephantiasis in the testicles. wa ruwemou tehe wa natheki wakapirayou.

elephantiasis in the testicles. wakapi.

to open more the edges of a container or vessel. uhehekei.

to be cluttered (a place); to be in disorder; to be piled up (people). hishikiãi.

to be full to the brim. manikiwe.

it was he who kept my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object under water by placing a stone on top of it. kaokoam.

the fish will be peppery/spicy. yuri a nakiprariyo.

it will be peppery/spicy. nakiprariyo.

at night they performed the heri ritual: "Women, you must all participate. titi ha pe herima: "suwe pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she. ", the elders exhorted. ", pata e pe kuu ha kuparuni (mit.

to sing together, to perform a ritual chant. herii.

the man went in company of the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). poretihe, ya ki nini thapoimi kutaeni.

to mix, to intermingle different objects. poretihe.

"I tore the cloth, I brought you a strip of cloth in a longitudinal direction", tell me that. "ya siki sheriria aheterema, ya siki kãi re horepohe", ware nowã ta thari.

in a longitudinal direction. horepohe.

I was walking on the path when he came to meet me. pei yo hami ya huu tehe a mi hetuama.

to go to meet someone; to come to see someone. hetuama.

eh you, give a turn around there. kiha kahe a ta ãyoiku.

give a turn around there, go around there. ãyoiku.

I am the song of the Yoreshiãmi Spirit passing before you. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope e.

bird; Monasa sp. (Bucconidae). yoreshiãmi.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to separate the toes with the hand. kakatai.

also the women scratch themselves with a sharp stick during the ritual of their first menstruation. suwe pe yipimou tehe pe kãi hãsikou.

sharp stick, during the unokãimou ritual [to scratch oneself repeatedly, to keep scratching oneself throughout the ritual]. fãsiki.

Unknown. ishi.

hold it firmly. a ta rohothoiku.

older brother, hold firmly for a moment. ãi a wãri ta rohothotaru.

to hold firmly for a while. rohothokei.

to have surpassed (in height), to have become bigger than. parorayou.

to soften several objects. fepeha.

to cut into several parts, to slice. hahetimai.

he/she/it went with the others to the forest. urihi hami a nokarayoher i m a.

he/she/it went with the others. nokarayoher.

it's the last time you come, I told you frankly. tahiapi re wa huu, tahiapi re, wã ta wawetoa shoaiku.

what is known or what is thought; to denounce someone. wawetokei.

the tapir was infested with ticks. shama a toripioma.

to have ticks, to be infested with ticks. toripi.

I make a ring with the vine. thoo ya thotho motoreprai.

to start forming a circle or ring. motoreprai.

to walk around. hatuhaturimi.

now, immediately. waiha.

the large carrying basket is gray like the earth. wii ke a pata mimou koshi.

gray, earth-colored, stained with earth. kroshi.

the cresta of the paují is erect. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to have become erect (fur or feathers of an animal). mãririrayou.

the multibandeados tilingos have transverse lines on the chest. piremari koshi pe pariki yãpruta.

to have a transverse line or stripe; to paint a transverse line on the body. yãpruta.

there are lightning flashes. the mi yãmimou.

to occur once (lightning). yãmitou.

in every place where he had dried his bleeding penis against the trees, there were red lines marked. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami hiki tiprutuwe.

to dry by rubbing against something. hãhio.

they made me rest again at the place where the path leads out. yo he haope ha yare kãi wãshimi horuu re kopeiwehei.

the place where a path ends or leads out. haope.

to smooth locally, to smooth in one place and not another. frakahakei.

the herd of cattle is near here. ahetepara ware ke ki hiraa kure.

now it is truly close. yamaki komii kooma, pe the komii ahetetariyo kurei.

to approach, to get closer. cawe.

the nutria escaped immediately. ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to escape, to flee. tokuni.

to protect oneself by means of a fence of branches or palm leaves. pesimou.

quédense tranquilos, no roben, no dejaré de prohibirles (que molesten a los demás). kiha ya wã no wasio kuyeheo mai ke the.

to do something. huritihehe.

he took the path and entered the collective house. pei yo hami a kuaaherima, shapono hami a harayoma.

to enter or exit, to pass through an opening, to penetrate, to be born, to sprout (a plant), to emerge from the ground. ku*prou.

mode of locomotion of reptiles. ethethou.

to receive something that was harvested in that way. pahetipei.

climb up the trees firmly and harvest fruits (said of upriver). wafeki fa rofothoani, wafeki ni thao.

climb up the trees firmly and harvest fruits. rofothoani.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense a bow quickly or for a brief moment. iyotai.

to become thin, to lose weight. rasisou.

(related to . mi yehe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). moshohãwe.

to be generous. shi ihita.

to become weak, exhausted. he pahatoko.

behind, at the back. fnohãmi ha(mi).

behind, at the back. fnohãmi.

my ear is plugged. ya hiyokaki ka komãkema.

my ear is plugged. ka komãkema.

I was sitting (a moment ago). ya ma re roohe.

progressive aspect marker. RV-progr.

hekura associated with the blue jay. piyawa namoriwe.

blue jay. namoriwe.

to have compressed, to have tightened. ãkikikei.

to hurry to leave a place behind while moving. piyetai.

it is said when many bunches of pijiguao are ripe. yakrihiwe.

to smell sour or acidic. ni nashiri.

to smell sour or acidic. nashir.

sparse, scarce. resheshã.

to make scarce (perfective). resheshãkei.

sparse, scarce. resheshã.

to loosen a knot without untying it by sliding it. waroropei.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to fall and scatter on the ground (fruits), to spread out on the ground. yapikou.

then, what is happening to them (where they are). weti naha pei wamaki kuaai kupiyewe.

there, upriver, is where my garden plot is located. kiha ke ya hikaripi theka praa kupiyeheri.

to be in a certain state in a place different from the place of utterance. -piyew.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to break into small pieces. nakashiprou.

presence. kuami.

the burning breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

(water surface) to undulate, wave. fu pakayumou.

to propagate, spread (wind, water); to undulate, wave (water surface); to break, run over. pakayumou.

you will not get a large pot if you do not make cotton skeins. shinari wama the uko thaprai mao tehe parãikana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

aluminum pot. parãikana.

firewood. ãkoshoku.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

he arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to follow, to walk behind. nohão.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to have nothing more to eat in one. hãrokore.

to kill someone to avenge a war death. ãtãri ãhi shetekeprai.

to dry out inside (wood). kakashiprou.

para. bú.

null. sharapi.

he had placed the blowgun vertically on a rock and kept it hidden on the Mountain-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. rihu ke a ha tikemakini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma.

to place a long object vertically on top of another, or in extension of the other; to sit on top of; to seat a child on a load in a carrying basket to transport them in that way; to tell someone to position themselves in a canoe. tikepramakei.

sit (at the foot of the tree, where the speaker is perched). a ta rotho.

sit (at the foot of a tree, where the speaker is perched). rotho.

by there some begin to paint themselves. ki prawe hami ai the pe yãmoprarou.

begin to paint themselves. yãmoprarou.

I provoked the return of the hekura. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

to provoke the return, to oblige to retrace one. tatomarei.

plant or animal taxonomic system. sunukama.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. fhuko siki presheshewe.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. resheshe.

to soften (the ground), to become muddy (terminative). kaweheprou.

the noise of an outboard motor was heard downstream that was going upstream. motoro a wã petarekirio, a wã mi yãmokirioma.

that was going upstream. yãmokirioma.

The doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to be riddled with holes or punctures. tereshã.

word of Ye. kotoma.

upriver speech. sufrafra.

in an instant we painted our faces black and on that background, we traced sinuous lines with our fingernails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to trace a line on the face or body with the fingernails. tikekekei.

to close a burrow by burying tightly aligned sticks. hikiniprai.

only some splinters were scattered on the ground. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to expand, to enlarge, to become extensive. praukuai.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just gone through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

to constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole). ayaprayoararomi.

the ancestors transformed into sloths. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

they transformed into sloths. ihamarariyoma.

immediately the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the surface of the water. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma.

float (durative, plural object). pokekou.

(sound of striking wood). krehe.

sound produced by a wooden object when struck. krehe.

to remove the damaged part of food in a circular motion; to remove hot food from boiling water by stirring the liquid in a circular motion to make the solid rise to the surface. yakoreprai.

a type of tree (Araliaceae), its wood is excellent for fire. mafei.

(no clear translation provided). pehi niyã.

they transformed, I looked and saw that they were directing their bamboo-tipped arrows towards us. pe ihamamo shatiprakema, rahaka re pe ki re puhuruoperei.

they transformed. ihamamo.

I'm going to hurry to form a ring with it. ya the wapepraai ta shos hokekei.

to form a ring or arc with an object. shokekei.

to empty. prokoai.

1. to crackle, to sputter 2. to pass rapidly. shãishãi.

todos se ensucian el rostro. pe mi shamihou.

¿en qué dirección partieron. weti hami ke pe mi kuprariyoherii kuhe.

face, visage. shamihou.

to have oneself painted with transverse lines on the body. tiprutamou.

to know who one is going to kill; to have decided what good one will ask for during a trade transaction. nohi nakapou.

I know what I will ask for (during the trade transaction). matohi ya nohi nakapou.

to have a justified reason. nakapouhe.

double-barreled shotgun. erekerimi.

the two of them headed directly towards the prey. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to head directly towards (an enemy, prey, etc.). tiheriprou.

to fall and get caught. wahehai.

to make someone commit an act, as a result of which they later feel trapped in a situation. wakewericon.

he went to look for earthworms in a place where rocks were scattered. maa ke mape hothopramope hami kohoromi e shipe torarema.

they are hanging from the posts that support the roof of the ancestors' house. wake hopraretahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waima pukiwe.

indicates that several objects in an identical state are dispersed. prawepe.

to be soldered one to another (long objects). erekewe.

hold him down on the ground, I'm going to break his kidneys with a heel strike. mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo ya mi wãri ta kahekipra ke.

to break someone. kahekiprai.

Baba was short, he was of low stature. heweriwe hokatawe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi, yahatotowe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi.

to be short, to be of low stature. atoto.

To become flaccid, to lose rigidity (tobacco plant). koa.

there was a landslide and everyone fell rolling down. mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururayoma.

to slide, to roll down a slope. nihoro.

banana variety from the Waika region. kuratha waika.

Waika region. waika.

causes the eyeball to become red. acom.

causes the eyeball to become red. acom-.

the pain. ni kreteni.

pain, ache. kreteni.

the one who growls a lot (= the jaguar), I will kill it, I will make it cook (stirring the broth), then I will eat it, I will eat it. ei ke ki misisiã re thetheare, ya ha niyaprarini, ya ha tikuruarini, ya wai ta yaio, ya wai ta yaio.

to mix in that way more than two powders. tikuruarini.

to smoke (tobacco). ukuku.

hijo, sígueme de cerca (lit. oãsi kamiye re rihami a nosi ta prakeiku.

los jóvenes Yãnomãmi no saben seguir una pista, son incapaces de acercarse (a sus enemigos), no sabrán como acercarse a ellos. pei yo pe kãi nosi pou taomihe, yãnomãmi ihirutawe the ikuo mai ke the, the prakepramai totihio mai ke the.

to get close, to approach. prakekei.

we call each other to gather again. yamaki pokomayoma yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to gather, to assemble, to reunite. kokãmoni.

object whose edge has been folded several times on itself. koherãrei.

Is he still alive. a mishiã hai shoawe.

to be out of breath, breathless. fmishiãki pakukutou.

to breathe regularly, to be alive. fmishiãki.

they were already hanging by their arms, the ancestors had turned into sloths. the pe yakukuprawe waikiwe ha, poreri ke the ihamarariyoma.

to hang by the arms; to hang upside down by the arms and legs (like sloths); to hang with all one. yakukukei.

when we had left the morichal behind, we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to leave a place behind, to go further than. parokei.

it has just disappeared, alas. a wãri mraa re tikoruherihe.

to disappear, to vanish. tikoruhe.

it was The Beautiful One (Õmawe) who planted the leaf in the ground. katehe a yai re kuini hena ithãparema (mit.

beautiful (referring to living beings). katehe.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to crush or destroy by kicking (a semi-spherical object). katikikei.

the terrifying noise made by the wind (lit. watori ke pe mamiki no hoã pata re kirihiparurei.

the terrifying noise made by the wind (lit.: made by the feet of the wind). kirihiparurei.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (to see his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokekou.

to make love. morosi.

to be soft, flexible. u ka horahora.

to be soft, flexible; to swirl, make eddies (of water). horahora.

they make love (the two of them). ke kipi wamou.

to make love, to have sex. wamoma.

he went when he had finished speaking. e kuu tehe a koã ha koruherini.

he went when he had finished speaking. koruherini.

Tucán utilizó afrodisíaco y así transformó la mente de la mujer (para seducirla y llevársela a su casa). puhipe yai tharariyo, perf.

to transform the mind, to seduce. tharariyo.

bring here (on the back) a skin of the tangará bird (of the hehehemi species) from the Waika. waika hehehemi e siki ta yehimaparihe.

bring (transporting on the back). yehimapa.

to be a little light. fherehehe.

will you two go. kahe waheki hupe.

you two do it. kahe wahekini the ta thapi.

you two. kahe waheki.

they make love (they two). ke kipi wamou.

to make love (polite speech), to have sex. sirisirimo.

in an instant the woman became pregnant and her belly quickly swelled. en un instante la mujer estuvo encinta y su vientre rápidamente engrosó.

to be pregnant. poreri1.

to kneel. hithei.

to be partially visible. waehea.

the man was moving while continuing to tightly compress Siroromi. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to bore a hole by compressing, constricting or tightening something firmly. ãkikiprai.

immediately she insulted him, she insulted that young man (myth). e mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma (mit.

she insulted him. mãririãprarou.

to climb rapidly. hiwara.

to do something in a hurry. rere.

I drink water. mau ya u koai.

the beehive is really splendid, let's drink the honey (mixed with water). puu ke a topraa yaia, pema u ta koa.

if only I could drink fresh water. si ahi ya the u wãri ha koarini.

to drink regularly, to have the habit of drinking (a certain liquid), to drink several times in a row. koaprai.

they wanted each other and lay together in the same hammock (to make love) without anyone noticing. ke kipi nohimayoma, ke kipi yakao hãthooma.

they wanted each other and lay together in the same hammock (to make love) without anyone noticing. nohimayoma.

there was a wasp nest in the place towards which I was going, the wasps came out and I started running. pina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

let's (the two of us) burn the bee nest. kopina ke yahe hisikai.

wasp nest. pina.

to be folded or have been folded once, to be partially rolled up. wapurea.

to begin to dye or paint something yellow. frãihiprai.

they (the hekura) set fire to my legs. ware mathaki wake re piyeamape ye e.

legs. piyeamape.

some, a small quantity (of countable objects). porakapi.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisiai.

dig here. heha ke theka ta thapraa.

sit here. heha a ta roik u.

you young people, come sit here (upriver dialect). ihiru pe, feha ke pe ta roikiyo.

here (at the place where the speaker is located). feha.

they are the ones who make me advance ahead as an explorer (when they go to war). re the peni yare nosi pariapramai totihiowei.

to advance ahead as an explorer. pariapramai.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered with bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to cause to have a bruise. hãepotopiãmai.

the child is hungry. mamokaki thãnoka.

to be hungry. thãnoka.

al venir aquí hice un rodeo para evitar a la gente Arimawe. ãrimawe theri ke iha ya e ma re ãyoikiyohe.

no se les ocurra ir a atacar al anciano que vive en Arimawe. ãrimawe theri pata a wai re kui, a wãhã wayoai puhi topraotihehe.

a place name. Arimawe.

pongámosle una rama con varias horquetas a nuestras flechas. rãhãrã pema ta hiima.

Rama con varias horquetas, utilizada como mezclador o como punta de flecha para matar pajaritos. yohorãki.

I rub the wapu fruits against the bottom of a basket. wapu ya ki hipii.

to rub toxic fruits against the wall of a basket after soaking them for some time. hipri.

to have the foreskin tied to a cotton thread around the waist (perfective form). mo ãtetekei.

to tie or bind something quickly (perfective form). ãtetekei.

to make dry; to protect from rain. wehetiamai.

Sloth came down and sat down immediately slowly. shimiyeteopewe a ha ithoruni a opi roa shoakema (mit.

Sloth of two fingers; Bradypus didactylus (Bradypodidae). Mythological ancestor who causes the death of Rabipelado and is indirectly the cause of the diversity of birds.. shimiyeteopewe.

Banana and meat. Wake u heri.

and. u.

to make an object thick. supraprai.

on the shoulders and on the tail he placed a basket. pei hakoki hami, pei teshina ha yorehi ke e si kãi re shatimakeiwei.

placed, put on. shatimakei.

richal. komokotore.

to growl. misisiãmou.

when they had already left, the shaman came out of the house and called the jaguar with a whistle. herani, ira a horomirema : cuando ya se habían ido, el chamán salió de la casa y llamó con un chiflido al jaguar.

whistle. chiflido.

calf (of the leg). matha shiãpi (pei).

calf. shiãpi.

we will stop several times on the way to eat. p efeki iyaa kãi roataroferipe.

we will stop several times on the way to eat. roataroferipe.

his son-in-law lifted his head again. pe hekamapi e mi nonotou korãyoma.

to lift the head repeatedly (iterative). nonotaai.

to become soft, to become flexible. uhurupiai.

they have accompanied them. pe yaurayoherii ke a kuhe.

to accompany someone. yaurayou.

The disease demons devour my flesh (= they strip me of flesh). shawara ke kini yare tire-sheai kure.

1. Remove a louse stuck to hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; detach with the nails fragments of meat from a bone. 2. Become very thin.. tireshe.

line up (and silently) like beans. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to line up, to align. shaninia.

the house is located there (for a long time). kiha yãno kua kupiyeti.

to be located elsewhere for a long time/distance. piyeti.

to damage/deteriorate rapidly. wãrititou.

in a low voice; barely audible. mahaniniwe.

to cause the noise produced by the vibrations of a taut string. phãophãomomai.

supernatural beings, considered responsible for certain diseases. rããri.

farts always have a smell. shiã ke pe ni ukukuo si ihehewe.

to smell something repeatedly (perfective of durative). ukukuãrei.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

1. to relax, loosen, undo; 2. to untie, loosen; 3. to flee, escape, evade during an attack. hiho-.

do not be afraid when young people direct bamboo-tipped arrows towards you. ihiru pe rahakapi mi re puruhouwei ha, pe kiritihe.

what do I care that you direct your arrows at me. ke ki mi wãri puruhamai ta pera she (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to converge, to head in the same direction; to have one. puruhouwei.

bird (unidentified) belonging to the Columbidae family. hekehekemi.

(I noticed that they had come to harvest several bunches of bananas), the stalks (broken in half) hung towards the ground. kuratha si pe mi wererewe re thai: (noté que habían venido a cosechar varios racimos de plátanos), los tallos (rotos por la mitad) colgaban hacia el suelo.

banana stalks (broken in half). mi wererou.

seem, appear. mimou.

he inclined towards the ground to listen (the subject is in a tree). the yimika wãri ha tapraikuni, the mi wãri ha tepraikuni.

to incline, to bend down. mi teateamo.

to the. al.

Conoto was the first to be impregnated by the leg. kanapororiwe matha hapa shipenarayou no kureshi.

you were impregnated (lit. wa shipenarayoma.

to cause to become pregnant. shipenamarei.

(it) stops stinging. noshi imããi.

to stop stinging. imããi.

habla del sur del Orinoco. siko.

to hurry back on one. patakei.

he wanted to grab the branch of the tree. hii ke hi poko niya ha huweani.

to grab, to seize, to catch. huweani.

they (two) have killed each other. kama ke kipi shepirema.

they have killed each other. shepirema.

(birds) perching side by side. he wirinaai.

I group them putting them in a row. ya the hiraa wirinaai.

to be lined up side by side, to be perched side by side (birds). wirina.

the hekura were watching the path. hekura peni ke pe yo nohi yetekaimama.

they were watching. yetekaimama.

to offer or present something to someone, to extend an object to give it to someone. totopei.

I put the clothes to soak. iro ya siki kãkema.

He soaked the wapu fruits, and much later he asked his mother-in-law if it was time to eat them. wapu a ha kãpãrini, the no tetehetou tehe pe yesi iha e the wãrima.

to soak, to leave soaking. kãkema.

to cut a portion of a fruit, remove a piece or slice by cutting from the stem to the opposite end (as a melon is cut); to cut an object that is more or less round in this way. hakaro.

to cause blisters. poshomararei.

to separate into two groups. pashihi.

the rain is imminent (lit. maa a prakewe.

imminent rain. prakewe.

we tensed our bows, but the white-lipped peccaries turned back. yama the iyopou, ware ke ki he pata tatorayoherii.

since Macagua was annoyed, they turned back. prereimariwe ke a hushuo the no wã ha, pe e he tatopariyoma.

retrace your steps. a he ta tatoru.

to turn back, to retrace one. tatorayoherii.

to be convinced. hehepou.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed when falling to the ground (a single object). tikuihuai.

(habla de río arriba). here.

to do different things. yaiatarai.

that is far away, downriver. the he yatheheakirioa.

far away, at a great distance. yatheheakirioa.

belonging to the taxonomy of animals and plants. taxowe.

the two were confused. pe pruka roa ma kupe fãifãiyomiriwe.

they were confused. fãifãiyomiriwe.

they constructed the bridge. the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

to place horizontally (long objects), to draw a horizontal line. rereakei.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

bad. puﬁ.

looking for turtles (lit. nohi wãsa.

to search, to look for. wãsa.

he does not gain weight quickly. a preprao haiomi.

to have a strong desire to sleep. fmaharishi preprou.

to feel the effects of a substance strongly. fwayu preai.

to intensify, to increase, to grow, to develop, to expand (a cavity). preprou.

1. Synonym of . fperio shimakao.

ay, la mujer tenía tanto miedo que no paraba de correr de un lado para otro. suwe ke a kiriri ruaprarou ha tikoikuni.

to continue the same act while moving, or to repeat the same act in a group in the same place (spatial discontinuity). aprarama.

to buzz. reããmou.

to fray, to unravel. warokoshi.

I'm going to sit next to my older brother. ãiwe a wãri iha kamiye ya roo aheteo.

Don't touch my older brother's axe. ãiwe wama hãropi koshi wãri hupai mai.

my older relative (male). ãiwe.

aspirate the soft pulp. wãpumiai.

to cry, to have tears in the eyes. mapu upe hai.

tear. mapu.

while we walked following the ridge, some went to look for plantains. yamaki ha hesikarini ai peni kuratha a nape ayouhe.

following the ridge. hesikarini.

fart that prolongs emitting a more or less high-pitched noise. kiyomou.

to have partially carved or grooved circularly. eshehemararei.

the hair; the head of hair. hethãnãuku.

to keep the head down for a moment. teiprao.

they lay down on each side of him in a hammock. thoo ke thoku ha ke kipi parekea mi hetutua ha shoaikuni.

to be or place oneself on each side of a person (usually to eat). hetutuo.

bone marrow, gastric mill of crab. oyoshipe.

to retrace one. tatoai.

the moriche fruits take on a slightly yellowish color when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to take on that color (of the eteweshi fruit). okoroshiãi.

to receive visitors with shouts and noise. eraramo.

the chicken eats its egg. kakara a nathe wao.

to eat. wao.

upon arriving he stuck his machete into a post. kama e siparapi shatia shoamapeheroma.

even though the package of fish was burning, upon arriving he remained still. yuri e hãro ma ishii tehe a wãri kutaa shoapeheroma.

to do something upon arriving. vhv.

jaguar, hombre valeroso (diálogo ceremonial) (lit. fmihi a pata re nosiyemoyahi.

growls. nosiyemoyahi.

to have an insatiable hunger for meat. fnaiki oweheproimi.

to have an insatiable hunger for meat. oweheproimi.

to group together (birds). he wirinaai.

I group them putting them in a line. ya the hiraa wirinaai.

to group together (birds). wirinaai.

Hesi is a term for cockroaches and beetles. Horã hesi es un término para cucarachas y coleópteros.

round and rigid object. hesi.

we followed the watercourse downstream and discovered a large number of paujíes. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. kirio.

present tense marker. -aprarai.

(related to) to be juxtaposed. hakaro.

no lo comas. a warihe.

no lo des and also it can be The word 'he' in Yanomami means 'to insist'. the hiyohe.

women, do not say that, do not insist on embarrassing us. maa, e naha pe kutihehe, suwe pe, yamare kiriapramai he prakehotihehe.

no. he.

to shorten. onohoãi.

to give various objects during a commercial exchange. pãyerekekei.

do not refuse to work, go to the forest (to hunt), you will grow up soon (what adults say to young people to encourage them to move). a mohimotihe, urihi hami ke wa ha huaani, a ta yawea hairi.

to refuse to work. mohimotihe.

we were hunting when we came out onto the path that leads to you. rami ke ya huma, pemaki he hatareyoruu kuhe.

to decide to head towards a path after having walked a long time through the jungle; to arrive at a path by chance. he hatou.

they brought the large baskets full of peppers near (the fire, to dry them). praki re pe thari pata titeteakemahe.

to bring near, to approximate (perfective, plural object). eteakei.

to go away, to leave despite a pain that forces one to limp. kayeherayou.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. hãshãemai.

to put the arms behind the back. yehitou.

fhii theri: syn. fhii theri: sin. of ora thetheeke 1 vb. de ora thetheeke 1 vb. intr. intr. t t h e e k e a i, inc. t t h e e k e a i, inc. : to shorten after repeated shocks. : acortar tras choques ri, palabra en desuso.

fora theri: community or member of a community located upriver from where one lives. fora theri: comunitheekou, dur. [theekou, dur. 2]. ] 2 vb. 2 vb. trans. trans. t t h e e k e a i, inc. t t h e e k e a i, inc. : to make a short bamboo arrowhead, to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (repairing it if damaged by impact). : fadad o miembro de una comunidad situados río bricar una punta de ﬂecha de bambú corta, acorarriba del lugar donde se vive.

shorten. theeke.

to wish misfortune on someone. waheo.

tomorrow I will leave. pruebe; henaha ke ya hupe.

tomorrow. pruebe.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to spread out, space out, disseminate. shororai.

to start to open (a fruit). hihathoprai: ponerse a.

to open in two (the shell of a fruit). hihathoprou.

(he/she) responds immediately. wã hai puhi yoprakei.

to respond immediately (when questioned or criticized). yoprakei.

my son-in-law. siyohaye.

(they two) shook a fruitless branch. proke ke the hiki ripukupiatarama.

(they two) shook a fruitless branch. ripukupiatarama.

when there is hunger habitually they retrace their steps, and that is what they have just done again. ohi ke pe, pe he tatotou tharei, pe he tatotou koã waikirayou ke a kuhe.

to retrace one. tatotou.

the children were hunting little birds. ihiru peni kirithami pe niyatumahe.

little birds. niyatumahe.

in. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit. they smeared their eyes with the brains of Rabipelado, it is said in the myth. ).

to smear, stain or dirty locally. hãhikei.

even the coati skins, they (the hekura) wear them bloody around their necks. yarushe pei siki ma kui, siki iye rukekepou kupohei (cha.

to be hung, hooked (plural objects). rukeke.

to mix, stir, agitate (perfective form). tikorerei.

it was the váquiros of body spotted like the leaves of the tokori tree that took possession of Sherekanawe. ware ke kini oni tokoripi hena raokowe ke kini sherekanawe a tereherima.

to be totally decorated with hand prints. raokowe.

to walk for a long time at the head. oratao.

to place the arms. wikoko.

it was Nosiriwe who diffused the tobacco. nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma.

diffused, propagated. paraamapotayoma.

I will prepare a wad of tobacco for him. pee ya nahe humikei.

the hand, to form a wad by pressing tobacco inside the hand. humishi.

he has covered his head with white down feathers. he horoimamorayou.

he has refused to give away his possessions. shi imamorayou.

to have done something (perfective). imamorayou.

the door is not secured; the door is not closed. fyoka prore.

to become loose, to become unsteady, to become wobbly. proro.

expresses the speaker. RVpi.

to shoot bamboo arrows (ruhu masi). tisimorayou.

it is my conuco (garden plot). kamiye ya hikaripi theka.

we, all of us, cut firewood. kamimiye pemakini koã pema ãsho poai.

our, ours (of all of us). kamimiye.

the spider monkeys move along the branches of the horoweti trees. horoweti hiki poko hami pasho ke pe imima.

horoweti tree trunk. horoweti mosi.

a type of tree. horoweti.

to ask for help, to request a companion. thãrimamou.

hallucinogenic drink (lit. puu ke u.

eat honey. puu upe ta wari.

honey. puu.

from the moment she returned to being alone, her mother cried for whole days. yãmi pe nii e kuo tehe e miã he weyahaoma.

to return. yãmi.

I observed that they left the plantains to spoil. kuratha pe ki wãrimomarema ke a sihei.

they left the plantains to spoil. wãrimomarema.

to get tangled in vegetation. warawaramou.

(myth): the leaves of the shãpinama shrub are abundant. yaharaa (mit.

a shrub; Sorocea muriculata (Moraceae). shãpinama.

they are already hung from the posts (myth). pukiwe (mit.

to be hung. pukiwe.

the child simply deposited the tobacco quid on the ground. ihiru ani pee ke nahe praa re pekeheriiwei.

to deposit on the ground. pekeheriiwei.

the tobacco is getting moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to dawn. rohoroai.

there the plants remained after the departure of the "Whites". kihi nape pe re perionowei pe yããpi hena heprariyoma.

to stay behind, to remain. hepramai.

when they were doing that, they dropped (the basket), and it transformed into a rahara monster. thamapii tehe, a ha huhepirini rahara ki pata kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to drop something. huhepirini.

to be impassive, stoic (in relation to pain, danger); not to show sadness during mourning. puhi rohothoo.

to overcome fear, resist pain. rohothoai.

tree that naturally has many folds. turarawe.

in the sky, towards the sky; above (in the direction of the sky). fhetu ha(mi).

arriba de la caída de agua se balanceaba el nido de jejenes (peti naki). pora a hetu ha peti naki pesi yãteyãtemoma (mit.

él disparó las pequeñas ﬂechas muy lejos, en dirección al cielo. rihu ke u he rumai ha kuikuni hei ke a hetu h a m i.

sky, heaven. fhetu.

Yoawe sat down completely ashamed. yoawe ke a wãri kirihiwe kãi re roonowei.

to be ashamed, to be afraid. roonowei.

if you go I will miss you. wa koo ha pe nohi iyotarei.

to miss (a person, a lost or stolen object). iyotarei.

to have a high and long nose. fhu turerewe.

to have a high and long nose. turerewe.

the opening of the basket is narrower than its base. yorehi si ka iyoyowe.

to have a narrower opening than the base. iyoyowe.

The hekura can be male or female, they are naturally given the name "eternal" (pãrimi) since they are immortal. Los hekura pueden ser varones o hembras, se les da naturalmente el nombre de "eternos" (pãrimi) ya que son inmortales.

eternal. pãrimi.

bead threader fish. morohoto thoku.

bead threader. morohoto.

the Mount Morãmãna that rises near here, at the foot of that mountain, who lives there. h e i morãmãna ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi keki kothe ha, weti ke a wãri roa.

a mountain name. morãmãna.

pónganse en camino, y que nadie se demore. pe ta kuhamiyo, ai pe huu heparuhe.

pónganse en camino. kuhamiyo.

to cut a stick. simitiai.

to be in a hurry. herekeherekemi.

the children are not prudent. ihiru pe moyawe ma re mai.

to be prudent, vigilant, attentive; to be on guard. moyawe.

object that was scraped in the indicated manner. shorerano.

to scrape off the surface of an object with the edge of an instrument. shorerai.

brother-in-law, observe the water to see if it is turbid. ãsi, u ushishi kua ta mi.

turbid, murky. ushishi.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

perfective form of the durative verb . hamishirarei.

to capture, seize, grab very quickly. huwetak.

you are always crying. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to cry, to sob. ehemomai.

wire-tailed manakin, male. patau.

supernatural being associated with bamboo arrowheads, lodges in the chest of brave men. rahakami.

to go to another community when there is a lack of food in one. ohiãmorãyou.

over there, on the other side of the river, another big mountain rises. kiha ai ke a pata hehu upraa re pekatuawei.

mountain, hill, elevation. hehu.

they were left adrift on the flood current. motu ke uni the pe kareprou ha kurarei (mit.

to move on several canoes, to start sliding or drifting on the water. kareprou.

as they kept committing incest with their daughters, they remained in the dark (= the day did not come). pe thee pe rii hami pe yaweremotii ha kuparuni, pe he titirayoma (mit.

to remain lying in a hammock with one arm bent under the head and legs spread out (ready to get down quickly if needed). peritiparuni.

here is where it appeared for the first time. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

they arrived and gathered. e pe re shimoopareyorunowei.

he fell ill and almost died. a ha perini a mori nomarayoma.

to appear, to happen. -riyo-.

Dominated by anger, I want to leave this dwelling. hei ya yãno wãri hoyai totihio puhio yaro, wãyuwã ke the pe wayu ha.

Anger, rage, wrath. wãyuwã.

(transformed into) snake, it immediately coiled up on itself. oru a pororoa shoakema.

to coil, curl up, roll into a ball (reptile, animal falling asleep). pororoa.

types. yatintos.

a foot (due to a blow or wound). mamiki*.

to carry a load by supporting it on the shoulders with a strap. pakataamai.

The black-faced antwren made the Yanomami men laugh by smearing their faces with its droppings. hiyomarithaweni ke a ikãã re totihimareiwei, yãnomãmi the moheki ha shiipimarini.

to cause or make something happen (in a completed or perfective sense for transitive verbs). -mari-.

Hoashiriwe (proper name). hoashiriwe.

subspecies, variety. amothami.

we dispersed through the jungle (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was moving where the others were passing. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

to advance making the foliage move. hishihishiprar.

we went together to gather firewood that we needed (to cook) for the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

to gather together to exchange goods (during a trade). pathothama.

to smear or spread some other more or less liquid material (so that it gets smeared with it). sheyeo.

to undulate, to wave (surface of water) [to undulate, to wave rapidly and repeatedly]. pakayupakayumou.

to be in a hurry. herekeherekemi.

his mother was really anguished. pe nii ke the puhi haruprou yaionowei.

to be anguished, to be distressed. harupramai.

relationship of father-in-law or mother-in-law to son-in-law. fekama.

aluminum pot. oya.

to tie on a loincloth. reio.

to speak with an accent. hawekemou.

to split. kahatho.

to cause to move, to set to work, to produce waves or undulations. kiãmarei.

his/her eyelids swelled. mamokaki warepiai.

to swell (eyelids). warepiai.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

to add something on top of what has just been offered, to give in addition. yauape.

they killed a big fat váquiro near a lagoon. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, a wãri wawewawe praope ha.

they extracted the bamboo tip (from the wounded body) and fat came out. rahaka a ukamahe, tapitapi e ki harayoma.

fat, greasy. tapio.

come, older brother, make love with her. pei, ãi, kaheni ke na ta waarari.

he made love with the woman and gave her the two gallinetas. suwe e na ha waakini e kipi hãshimo hipekema.

to make love (said by a man). kuwemo.

give me your machete. siparahe a ta hiyo.

he stole your tobacco pouch. pee he nahe a thomirema.

son-in-law, come let me remove lice from you. shei, hapo, nomahe ya pe ta mi (habla del sur del Orinoco.

your (singular). iparahe.

to become salty. mositiai.

fmo shãhe : flesh that surrounds the seed of a fruit, edible part of a fruit. fmo shãhe : carne que rodea el hueso de una fruta, parte comestible de una fruta.

flesh. fmo.

to see better he climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honeycombs that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi" (mit.

to climb a very tall tree to get one. yapai.

village of malignant beings (yai the) associated with ashes, they can take over the pei mi ãmo of humans to cause their death. yupu ushiri.

to remove or detach something by scratching with the nails. titheprai.

I intend to domesticate the little birds, and I am waiting for their eggs to hatch. kirithami ya pe hiima niya ha teani, ya natheki homomai.

to wait for seeds to germinate or eggs to hatch. homomai.

he/she is my younger sibling. aiye ke a.

younger sibling (brother or sister). eye.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age). eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

love. wamou.

to do it until the end, to realize everything. ya niaata el ﬁnal, realizarlo todo.

to do something completely, to realize everything. hodo.

he suddenly put his hand on the hanging leaves. henaki re teihiawei hami, imiki wãri wariprakema.

to hang down, to incline downwards (generally referring to leaves). teihia.

in a ceremonial speech, brother-in-law, I will speak, I will say that they show her. hei misikiri hena re kui, tamariyo, shori, kuuwei ke the.

ceremonial speech. sikiri.

I am the song of the passing Yoreshiãriwe Spirit. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope ye.

I already spoke to the women, I told them: "cry for the dead, cry for the dead". suwe ya pe nowã thaa waikirei kuhe, "pe ta ãmoãmo, pe ta heri".

to sing, to hum, to cry for the dead (euphemism). ãmoãmou.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

to attack, to assault, to kill. ishoa.

I covered my eyes. mi kehukei.

to cover one. kehukei.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

1. to twist, flatten; 2. to shoot many arrows at a target without hitting it; 3. to create unrest around someone by gathering or through constant agitation. tishiki.

the noise of the eyelids of the ceremonial dialogue. poshe mamokasi heã.

ceremonial dialogue. poshe.

when one lives in two neighboring dwellings, when one is close to the other, one does not fight (= one does not make war when one lives next to the other). pe peria ha heruruikini, pe tisusuayou, yãnomãmi the pe thamai ma re mai.

to be close together, to pile up, to hang one above the other. heruru.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

struck. asestó.

you know well that tomorrow I will leave you (to go somewhere else). henaha pe thapi heiai ma re kupiyei.

the pijiguao palms are in bloom (the speaker is in a place different from where they usually live). rasha a rarou kupiyei.

there is no one in the dwelling (located in another place). yano a proke kua kupiyei.

to be located in a different place than the place of the utterance. -piyei.

to be firmly tied, to be tied by a very tight rope. prohororoa.

to be winding, to have numerous meanders. fshokekewe.

ember. koa wake anamahu.

ember. anamahu.

he kept the ant nest on the ground near him. konakona pe pesi prapou heweoma.

ant nest. heweoma.

vegetable food that serves to. tehi.

vegetable food. tehi.

to get bruised (in one place). si wãoko.

to get bruised (in one place). wãoko.

to have aligned long objects in parallel (perfective aspect of the inchoative). masisirayou.

to break the tip. huhetikei.

to have finished debarking/skinning (an animal). tiprokorarei.

I'm going to touch your nose with the glans. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

to touch with the glans in a precise place. tiprushikei.

I possess the hekura within my chest. pãrimi ya pe wai huwepou totihitao thare ke.

to possess hekura within one. totihitao.

to drip (blood). iyepe rukekou.

to drip (blood). rukekou.

to have dried (water of a pond or lagoon), to have evaporated (cooking water of a food). wehetia.

when there is nothing to eat one does not have much will to work (lit. e naha re sipe oheprou kuo totihio, the pe ohotamapou ma re mai.

to have the will to work. ohotamapou.

the momo fruits are the ãpru (beetles). momo pe re kui ãpru ke pe.

dung beetle, scarab beetle. ãpru.

to cut to take for oneself. pakarorei.

they did not offer anything to Minero. re tareiwehei (mit.

they did not offer him anything. tareiwehei.

I stopped doing it a long time ago. yetu ha ya huheprariyoma.

Jaguar let go and fell. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni, a kea shoarayoma (mit.

1. Abandon definitively an activity, a habit, stop chewing tobacco or inhaling hallucinogens; stop breastfeeding (a child). 2. Release, let go, yield. huheprou.

to become less and less visible in the dark. aroshoprou.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway (from the southern Orinoco region). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

to relax, loosen, undo; to escape, flee, dodge during an attack. iho.

1. Acquire a floury consistency (a food). 2. Dry out inside (wood). kakashiai.

ellos son poco numerosos. pe kutaa.

Poco numeroso, en pequeña cantidad. kutaa.

(habla de río arriba. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to tie around the waist, immobilize by holding around the waist. hãrokorei.

as Bachaco cut down the trees, the corn began to grow by itself. koyeriwe kihami hii re hiki tuyei re kuaanowei, yono mo hai yauai re kuaaowei.

to occur successively (two events), to happen as a consequence of a previous action. kuaanowei.

to enter into dense vegetation. therayoherii.

to separate a portion of meat by breaking it off with the hand, in order to offer it; to take a bit of tobacco from one. hakokoai.

with the jaguar's dye the edge of our body designs smiles in a frightening way. iraira nou peni yamaki oni sh kasi watewatemou no re kirioimi (cha.

the sun's rays when the star is low on the horizon and the light is divided between the clouds or the tops of the trees. fmothoka sh shererou.

emanation, light; ray (of moon, of sun). sh.

He stuck the pole into the ground. he pasuai wake siki.

to stick a long object vertically into the ground. pasuai.

to start making a short point. manakoroprai.

1. To dawn, for the day to break. 2. To begin to recover, to begin to regain consciousness (when under the effect of a hallucinogen).. wakaka.

bee (unidentified species). narimi.

be attentive while walking. a ta moyaweaheri.

to make someone prudent, attentive. moyawemai.

Catch the oshe aka termites and offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe.

to capture termite soldiers. tithe*o.

the child was crying. ihiru a miã ikima.

Nosiriwe was sobbing for lack of tobacco. nosiriwe ke a peshiri miã ikima (mit.

to cry for a dead person. ikima.

they caught the fish. kama peni yuri pe yokeraremahe.

they caught the fish. yokeraremahe.

to be sick. moparu.

I will look for it going around (the place). hei re ya the taeai ãyokãi totihio kuperei.

to go around (a place, an object). ãyoko.

to feel repeated stabbing pains in the stomach. fratafratamou.

food that has fallen apart due to overcooking. kohihirariyo.

malefic demons opened his chest. yai theni a pariki kakaprarema.

they opened (his) chest. kakaprarema.

to clean one. aka wamore.

to shake or rub one. yaisiprou.

he is happy. moroshi yorurewe.

to be happy. yorurewe.

he will go to the forest. hei ai yoka re horere.

forest. yoka.

deposited the fire on the dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke ﬁ pata poko fewe ha, wake makekema.

abandoned wasp nest. fhewe.

to dry, to smoke, to cure (a wound). fe.

they have blown horeprema at us, they have directed it towards us. kiha horeprema ke pehiki wãri horashikei ma re kurohei, hei horeprema hiki ma re yarepiyekiri.

magic plant cultivated, guate; Maranta arundinacea (Marantaceae). The women pulverize it, deposit the powder in the palm of their hands and blow it against the adversaries of their community in the course of a combat, to provoke their flight. The powder can also be spread over the footprints of enemy warriors, to weaken them and cause them leg pain; delayed in this way, the enemies can be reached and attacked.. kurohei.

it was Hiyomarithawe who made him laugh. hiyomarithaweni a ikãã re totihimareiwei.

one who made (someone) laugh. Hiyomarithawe.

I was stringing beads. tope ya ki hiima.

to thread, to string beads. hiimai.

they cut the roof poles of the house. hãto re nahi re peyeiwehei.

they cut the roof poles. peyeiwehei.

to start feeling or be feeling a violent stomach pain after a shock or after receiving a blow. yoothoo.

he kept it in a cloth bag. sako hami the titipoma.

bag, sack, plastic bag. sako.

stream of water. u wiriri.

stream of water. wiriri.

"Yes. "awei. ", the little bees did not content themselves with saying that. ", wãri puu nari re pe wai kuu petaonomi.

they did not content themselves with saying that. petaonomi.

Rabipelado simply disappeared behind the house. nãroriwe shikã hami ke a wãri mratou re perayoherinowei.

they precipitated crying. priririaprarou.

they (the two of them) transformed into the omãyãri demon, making it dangerous everywhere, that is how diseases were created (myth) (southern Orinoco dialect). ke kipi re omãyãrirariyouwei, ihi a wayuamai aka praukou re kutariyouwei, ke ki shawara kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to make dangerous. wayuamai.

to tell someone to tighten/narrow several objects. fmakosimamai.

to begin to fly (a bird). maparuheni.

the sun is inclining towards the horizon. the misi pata yahatotoherii.

to descend, to come down, to lower. yahatotoai.

the oroweshi flowers gave off a strong smell and also it can be The word 'rukei' in Yanomami means 'to enter, to penetrate'. oroweshi ke ki ni kreteri rukei ha kuparuni.

I usually get into (the trunks of trees) to eat honey. kamiye pei ke ya ha rukeoproherini, puu ya u pe waaprai tharei.

to give off a strong smell. rukei.

to mix powders with the tip of the fingers; to stir, agitate, mix (liquid). tikurai.

a wasp stung me without me realizing it (the speaker realizes it). kopinani yare tikanoma.

they messed up your hair when cutting it, they messed it up without you realizing it (from a ceremonial dialogue). wa the miki wãriãi totihionomahe, wa miki wãriãnoma.

indicates inferential modality in verb endings. nowe.

it is necessary that you dig the ground as you advance. mashitha wa ha titheriherini.

it is necessary that you dig the ground as you advance. titheriherini.

there are animals in the forest (or: the animals live in the forest). urihi hami yaro pe huu.

the first to climb were all the animals that live in the trees. isi hami pe re huuwei pe hititiwe tua pariketayoma.

to live, to dwell, to inhabit (referring to animals). huuwei.

Brazil nut trees. kohoki.

hunt animals (= go hunting). yaro pe ta niyahe.

to hunt animals, to go hunting. niyahe.

they (two) found a twisted oruga on the ground and picked it up. kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepireiwei.

twisted or deformed by cooking. prithothowe.

I really want meat. y a naiki totihiwe.

cannibal hummingbirds live on the river bank. teshori naikia theri ke pe hiraa kupe.

to eat meat or fish. naikai.

vamos en la misma dirección que los váquiros. ware ke ki mi re kuahare hami pemaki mi kuaai mi hetua.

plaza. kuahare.

when he cut the liana the tree loosened abruptly. thoo thotho peprai tehe a pehi kãi yokerayoherima.

to loosen abruptly, to launch a magical substance by flicking, to catch a fish with a hook or fishing line. yokeai.

to place or be stuck to someone. pakuku.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal or plant). proromahiwe.

the ancestors rushed towards the place where there was a cacao tree. pohoroa ana hi upraope ha poreri ke pe re priririkei.

again the Waika rushed to leave. waika ke pe pririrou kooherima.

to converge rapidly in the same direction; to rush towards the same place. puhuru.

to strike blows on top, to drive in. pasuu.

sin. awe.

ritual. ritual.

to become smooth and glossy (hair of a dog). tãihirayou.

I'm thirsty, I will drink. ya amishiripi, ya hesi kewe.

your head sinks too much (the master says to the novice during initiation). wa hesi keo no re kiriowei (cha.

to drink, to lower the head to drink (jokingly). hesi keo.

to slip repeatedly while climbing a tree. yohehou.

to send someone from afar an invitation to do something, articulating the lips clearly but without making any sound, in order to maintain discretion: the interlocutor has to read the lips. It often refers to a romantic rendezvous. wahatomorayou.

to be brother-in-law of many people who live in different places. heriprawe.

to surpass someone from both the right and left at the same time. yakaromarei.

to have reached a medium size; to have gone from a large size to a medium size, to have reduced in that way. proweherayou.

Translation:. hãkãmiki sherere.

(habla de río arriba.). herere.

they had made the trunk of air between the tongue and teeth swell, which is called whistling in that way. apia ke hi hurumarei no kureshi.

to make swell, to make dilate. hurumai.

both resuscitated without the help of anyone. yãmi ke kipi horiprariyoma.

they resuscitated. horiprariyoma.

the back part of the cultivated field, the oldest part. hikari theka posi ka.

back part of the cultivated field. hikari theka posi ka.

to start deepening or making something deeper. koeheprai.

they take each other by the arm. iri misi ipihai.

to take by the arm. ipihai.

and at arriving put the package of fish to cook on the embers. yuri e hãro yapaharoma.

put to cook on the embers. yapaharoma.

Supernatural being, lives in the celestial disk (hetu misi); he is the son-in-law of Thunder. Personaje sobrenatural, vive en el disco celestial (hetu misi); es el yerno de Trueno. His ugliness is repulsive, he sends the souls (no porepi) of the per-. Su fealdad es repulsiva, envía a las almas (no porepi) de las per.

supernatural being. wãteyoma.

we are in the company of people who are not from our community, but nevertheless we are the ones who tie the arrow canes in the middle (that we have just collected, to transport them). kamiye yamaki re heshihiomopotayouwei, shereka ke yama peishoku pata re thaamaperei.

to find oneself in the company of people from another community or many other communities. heshihio.

to trap, enclose, hold an object firmly between two others. wãkiã.

it had not been said to itself that the fruits were extremely hard and that it was better to give up on them. the prohohowemi ha ya the ha ta tiratai.

1. To be tied with a very tight knot. 2. Hard, tough.. prohohowe.

to level, to flatten. resisiprou.

to disappear suddenly in the middle of, to be swallowed up. ohoprakei.

to flap wings without flying (a bird). yathethe.

to clear the ground, clean it, leave it clean in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. takakapei.

the ancestors who received the celestial disc on their heads, immediately transformed into amahiri. no patapi pe re sheparenowei, amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

they transformed/metamorphosed and became amahiri. sheparenowei.

she formed the wad without having properly passed the tobacco through the ashes (lit. riye totihiwe e nahe wãri humiprarema.

she formed the wad without having properly passed the tobacco through the ashes (lit.: she pressed the still raw tobacco in the palm of her hand). humiprarema.

en el conuco hay muchos racimos de plátanos (colgando de las plantas). hikari theka hami kuratha a perikiwe.

colgados en gran número (como personas en chorros). periki.

I don't have a quid of tobacco under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a quid of tobacco under the upper lip. hiipoimi.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for their house then. kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe (cha.

to inhale hallucinogens. epenamoti.

to draw a transverse line once, to paint a transverse line. yãprutaai.

our family is large (lit. yamaki yaharawe.

to be many. yaharawe.

to line up, to align. wirinakei.

to let rot (through negligence). horepimai.

I was biting my tongue. ya aka wetioma.

to bite one. wetio.

to have the habit of, to do assiduously. yairicon.

(habla de río arriba. prukunama ãsi.

a type of tree or plant. prukunama.

the dwelling of Yotenama had fallen silent, he had become completely quiet. yotenama ke yahipi eemou mai, the matha waia ha totihiparuni.

to have fallen silent, to no longer emit any sound. emoimi.

(Pimelodidae). ediano.

the attribute of the hekura (rihu u) was about to come to me. rihu uni ya nape mori ithou he yatiokirioma.

to be about to come, to be on the verge of coming. yatiokirioma.

1. Large amount of food. 2. Defend efficiently, resist with courage. wãrohãi.

to remove a tooth from the jaw (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetimai.

the rain is imminent (lit. maa a prakewe.

imminent rain. prakewe.

vomit repeatedly. wekekai.

oh you, woman, return to us immediately. wa siki kãi mi yapaa shoari.

woman. siki.

he went towards the place where I was standing. ya upraope ha a warokeyoruma.

Toucan was standing in front of the entrance. pei yoka hami mayepirithawe a upraoma.

to begin to be able to stand (a small child); to stop, to stand still, to be standing, to be ambushed (standing). upraprou.

to begin to paint two oblique lines that cross on the nose. yakiraprai.

expressing carnal desire. peshi e, peshi e.

female sex organ; she repeats incessantly: . peshiemiri.

(they) were one next to another. e naha re the he tipetewe.

to be one next to another (rounded objects). tipetewe.

to set up to spend the night, to build a temporary shelter. perimou: instalarse para pasar la noche, construir un refugio temporal.

to place, to put. huwe.

(upriver speech) Immortal people who live underground, resembling the Yanomami but living on a disc beneath the earth. akrehe.

to do a somersault. mohe hoteke.

to do a somersault. hoteke.

to cut with the wã hira (a type of knife). wahetiai.

a cannibal. herãmiriwe.

I, when I kill a peccary, transport it whole and that's how I carry it. kamiyeni ware ya pe pata ha niyaprani, ya pe pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

to hang at a low height. niyaprani.

the voice of the ancestor came from the depth of the den. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni.

from a distance. parutu.

the noise the little one was making could be heard: he was really nursing. ihiru ke a wai kruikru imou yaioma.

to produce a noise each time a sip of liquid is swallowed; the sound a baby makes when nursing. kruikru.

move away. a ta prahari.

they traveled a long distance. pe praharayoherima.

to move away, to distance oneself. prahari.

while Jaguar climbed higher up the tree, his arms could less and less embrace the trunk (which became thicker and thicker). irariwe ke pokoku suriroherima.

to climb a tree trunk that cannot be fully embraced by the arms, using a vine wrapped around the ankles. suriripeherii.

the taste that water acquires when it has remained too long inside a container, the taste of warm water. koa-mou he yauwe.

1. To be weak, to have lost strength. 2. To be flaccid, to have lost rigidity, to be bent (tobacco plant).. yauwe.

to grow (a human being, an animal). yawei.

dead. kreterei.

to clarify a path, to look for the way. katitipramai.

to start clenching teeth. wãsinitou.

to have the gaze turned towards. yaipariyo.

noise produced when blowing hallucinogenic into someone through a tube. shoi.

onomatopoeia, noise produced when blowing hallucinogenic into someone through a tube. shoi.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to get crushed or flattened by falling or after an impact. thekeheo.

why don't you give me some wood. wama the ãsho pe wai hore sherereaimi yaro.

give me. sherereaimi.

inaccessible den (it gets lost under rocks or thick roots). shi wãripraai.

to undulate, to produce waves. kitakitamo.

they live in dwellings situated next to each other. pe peria poaa.

to be or put next to each other. poaa.

breasts. sifuku.

to demonstrate with one. peshimou.

give me your machete. siparahe a ta hiyo.

he stole your tobacco pouch. pee he nahe a thomirema.

son-in-law, come let me remove lice from you. shei, hapo, nomahe ya pe ta mi (habla del sur del Orinoco.

your (singular). iparahe.

He has wavy or curly hair. Uu shi wãrihi ama.

to have wavy or curly hair. shi wãrihi.

she formed the wad without having properly passed the tobacco through the ashes (lit. riye totihiwe e nahe wãri humiprarema.

she formed the wad without having properly passed the tobacco through the ashes (lit.: she pressed the still raw tobacco in the palm of her hand). humiprarema.

gavilán, ave de rapiña (Buteo sp). oko utha.

to paint oneself on the face. hiporoshio.

to desgarrar or recortar longitudinally (terminative form). eririprou.

I keep having the urge to fart. ya shiã iheihemou.

to have the urge to fart. shiã.

to have fallen. iheherariyo.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to attach white down on someone. horoiai.

to give something to someone in its entirety. haikikei.

send your mother there to harvest corn, there where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to emerge, to pass over the water (long object, branch). shoroko.

you sleep while they make love with your wife. mio hearewe wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe (mit.

to make love. hiripraihe.

tell someone to go. komãrei.

las niguas se desprenden (de los pies adonde están alojadas). ihu nape hayoyai.

to detach, to come loose. hayoyai.

large edible caterpillar (upriver dialect variant of . paharuma si.

(related to) to kill. thehi.

it is undoubtedly because of those constant itches that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

and it is for that reason that I am still a good hunter. ya the pe yaropi niyãi nosiye.

reason, cause, motive. nosiye.

His hair is stiff and stuck together. Uu shititiai ama.

to have stiff and stuck together hair when wet. shititiai.

put yourself in the center. a mi ta thar i p r a r u.

to stay for a moment in the center. hariprou.

it hurts me. ya wari pe rii ha nini.

my foot hurts. ya mamiki nini.

to have pain, to suffer (terminative). físinikereprou.

to masturbate (a man). pikuku.

ella cocinó las dos gallinetas y las colgó (por encima del fuego). hãshimo e kipi tupoma, e kipi wai ha yaumakini.

gallineta (type of bird). tupoma.

The Yanomami paint themselves black when they go to war. pe wayu huu tehe yãnomãmi pe ishimou.

to paint oneself black (plural subject). ishiprou.

to move on the plain (after having walked in the mountains); to be located below (after having been above). pepiprou.

Carpintero enano se hinchó y la plataforma (sobre la cual estaba colocado el cadánosiyeriwe) se distendió. cadánosiyeriwe a ha shuwerini, hii hiki noshi hariraama.

something beautiful that has spread out or unfolded (e.g. the night). cadánosiyeriwe.

I clearly heard in a dream the song of the birds raromi konaki. raromi konari ke kipi ã mahariri ha topraikukirini (cha.

the song of the birds raromi konaki. topraikukirini.

he lowered the sun (myth). motoka a yahatotomakema (mit.

he lowered the sun. yahatotomakema.

to stir (something) once. tikoreai kukei.

to stir, to mix, to agitate. tikore.

I have just eliminated the pathogenic principle. ya the ki wayu hoyaaparei ke a k u h e.

eliminate. hoyaaparei.

the two demiurges learned to make dangerous bamboo tips. kupariyonowei.

they slept again. pe mio koomahe.

slept again. koomahe.

hesi tahapi: to have no hair, pe- V. hesi tahapi: no tener cabellos, pe- V. eshãmi. eshãmi.

to lack, to be without. pe-.

the lechosa (fruit) begins to be a little ripe in one place. shamakoro wãisipi a shopo patia.

to stain in several places; to set fires in separate places in the conuco (agricultural plot). patihai.

yaharaa (myth): the leaves of the shãpinama bush are abundant. yaharaa (mit.

abundant, numerous. yaharaa.

to peel the grains of yopo. hiprushi.

the arrow broke when it hit. ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei.

to cut transversely; to draw intersecting lines. yaheti.

to approach considerably, to get very close. ahetemarei.

1. A very thin woman who was a victim of manaka (a magical plant). 2. A canoe whose sides are too far apart (a defect in shape).. hehetewe.

he ate it all and returned home in a state of homicide and satiated. a waa ha haikirini a unokai ha kopoherini, petiri (mit.

in a state of homicide. haikirini.

to hang near the ground, to tie low (incomplete aspect). yahatotoai.

to hang near the ground, to tie low. yahatotou.

when it rains and they sit one behind the other (to protect themselves from the cold), they should make you sit in the center of the group they form. m a a a kei ha, the pe roo yehihimou tehe, mi ãmo ha ke wa kãi romapouhe.

to be seated one behind the other, with the thighs of those behind surrounding the buttocks of those in front. yehihimou.

and if I transfer it to another pot. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to transfer, to decant. heiakei.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). ihehe.

when he finished resting, he began to walk again. the shipenapi yaruo ha haikitaaruni.

to finish, to complete. yaruo.

they transformed into birds. pe kuprariyoma.

he got angry. a hushutariyoma.

learned, transformed into (perfective form of certain verbs). tariy.

He placed a vine on the ground to start the game. Ai kareretamakei.

to place a vine on the ground in order to provoke a confrontation between two sides, in a game that consists of pulling the vine to drag the opponent out of their field. ai.

to have arrived. potoshiai.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, drawing the body and taking momentum from the lumbar area to rise up. pushukupushukumou.

to curl up, to crouch with legs bent against the chest. pushukuai.

father-in-law, he wants to come here to skin us both. shoape, pehereki si niya re ikekeaimi ye.

to skin us both. ikekeaimi.

furuncle. yuu.

furuncle. yuu.

Cook the cassava roots and give them to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to give food to someone. iyamahe.

to have fabricated a slightly longer arrow than usual. tireherarei.

without a doubt he will give it as a gift. a no hipekepi.

he will give it as a gift. hipekepi.

dented, deformed by a blow (in several places). wãukuwe.

she laughed nonstop because her insides (lit. a ikãpraroma a hushomi ha shikioni (mit. : interior) were itching. ).

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. hushomiãi.

father-in-law, what is in the basket that you hung above the fire. shoape, mihi weti pei wa the pe thari yaumaparei kuhe.

it was because I drowned them that they went with the current. ya pe mishi ha tumaparini pe karorowe ha kui.

he entered the collective house after leaving the big basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to cause something to be in a certain position or state, with relation to the speaker, fire, water, above or below. -mapari.

to have been killed (enemy). no wãyuprou.

to have been killed (enemy). wãyuprou.

Monkey's tail: wito : merey. wisha shina: wito : merey.

monkey. wito.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

to push away vigorously, reject forcefully. hirururema.

I gather only a part of the fruits. himohimo ya ki ayaai.

Make fruits fall. himohimo ki ta kemari.

fruit. himohimo.

to form a block. hikini.

al regresar ella reconoció el lugar en donde se habían sentado. pe kãi roope hami the no ihipia re koreheriiwei.

recognize. koreheriiwei.

to be hungry. yariki.

disperse (when walking). pe ta rãikiroheri.

they had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni.

to disperse, to spread out. rãikio.

only some were able to quickly come out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to have come out of the water or a canoe, to be doing it. washirikei.

rough leaf (used for polishing bamboo arrowheads). ãrãko ã.

rough leaf. ãrãko.

to have painted round spots on someone or something by applying a ball of coloring moistened with saliva. hikikirarei.

while he was sitting still without moving, Yoawe (lit. wãrishewe ke a roa yãnikitou tehe, a mamo yeo tehe, suwe a tararema (mit. : the evil one) saw a woman. ).

to calm down, to become tranquil. yãnikitou.

metallic noise caused by the clash of a machete blade against a hard object. sirisirimou.

ant. ninihipe.

I have the habit of coiling a thick liana (around my ankles) because they generally wear out quickly (when climbing or descending a palm tree). prowehewe ke ya thotho pe motorewe thapou tharei, the pe kãi waruhou si ihehewe.

to form a ring; to be coiled, to form a circle. motorewe.

the flood waters were approaching, and the ground was crumbling. yetu motu ke u ha ahetoimani, pitha a hishishai re kuaaimaiwei.

underground water expanse. motu.

to become yellow, to turn yellow (terminative aspect). ãrãprou.

to widen, to expand, to make something wide. thepahaai.

the turtle quickly passed (from the ground where it was) to the footbridge (to cross the stream). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass, to move. piye.

they took the one who lived in this hearth. hei ke yãnopi re kui, a pararureherii kuhe.

the flood water came out dragging the Waika. motu ke u hai ha kuikuni, waika ke pe pararumai ha kuikuni.

to accompany someone during a trip or journey; to guide someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child); to make someone walk in front of oneself. pararuai.

to be hungry. wayaha.

to be less and less visible in the darkness (perfective, plural object). waroshorariyo.

maleficent supernatural beings associated with lagoons, who take possession of the soul of human beings. wawewaweri.

short, not wide (tying from which something hangs, carrying strap). usutua.

dust (plural). hekrãhekrã ke ki.

dust. ekrã.

he entered whistling. husi koikoimorayou.

to enter whistling into a dwelling (a visitor). husi koikoimo.

I'm going with the others to get water. mãu ya u ta ishakomai nareo sho.

the entire vine forms a hook. thoo thotho ishakowe.

to bend, to curve, to form a hook. hakoai.

to mix more than two powders in that way. tikururarei.

to break into pieces, to split, to divide. shetekamou.

my father-in-law. siyoha.

to clash arrows against each other; to strike the flat part of an instrument against something (to make noise), to strike with the palm of the hand. paisiai.

it is not far away. the poushokuwe.

to be near. poushokuwe.

after having rested completely, he began to call out again. a wãshimi horua ha haikitaaruni, a komii kooma.

to rest completely, to have rested completely. haikitaaruni.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to drop significantly before going to kill fish in it. thookororayou.

She is beautiful. Ama noshi hariwe.

beautiful, splendid. noshi hariwe.

to collect the hallucinogenic substance (lit. ayukuma yoai.

hallucinogenic substance. yorarutuni.

the canoe capsized. kanawa a he ohorayoma.

to disappear suddenly in the middle of something, to be swallowed up; to capsize (a canoe). ohorayou.

venomous snake, splendid snake (Bothrops sp. wãrishana waro ke ki.

to become splendid, to turn into a venomous snake. wãrishana.

I am the one who will make it flee. kamiyeni ya wãri yashuu.

when the butterflies arrived they expelled the chigüires from their dwelling. hurari peni kayurifanari pe yashuprai re kupeheronowei henaki.

to put to flight, expel in anger from a place, dislodge; to reject the enemy. yashuu.

to break into small pieces (southern Orinoco dialect) and also it can be The word 'nikashi' in Yanomami means '(no clear translation)'. nikashi.

to break into small pieces. nikashi.

female spirit associated with mountains, she is the owner of the waters with which the sick are cleansed and purified after a shamanic healing. hehuriyoma.

I will wake up. ya rãpe.

wake up. rãpe.

to remove a bamboo arrowhead from its shaft in the manner described; to kill a man (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). frahaka yãweteãi.

to make something spin with the arm (as one does when using a sling or bolas); to loosen an object that is attached to another (or to the ground), by pushing it slightly from side to side, to remove a bamboo arrowhead from the arrow shaft in which it is inserted. yãweteãi.

to deform the edge of a tool by striking it against hard objects. shokekamai.

although the hekura goes towards you, if it does not intend to go where human beings live, it will turn its head away. y ãnomãmi the nape huu maopehe ha, ihi re a huimama ma kui, a mi re yaithatariyowei.

to turn one. yaithatariyowei.

to begin to have desire. ohoro.

vuestros cuerpos no exhalan el olor del onoto. ni patheo ma re maohe ke.

exhale the smell. patheprou.

I must be sleepy, I'm yawning all the time. ya nami maharishi ya kahiki shiro rereo.

the son of Jaguar fell asleep immediately, with his mouth open. ira pe ihirupi miã kãi kahiki rerea shoapariyoma.

to open the mouth; to yawn. rereai.

(he) inclined the gaze (in the myth of the south of the Orinoco). motokariwe re e mi tea ha shoamaparini.

inclined the gaze. motokariwe.

to pick chili peppers. huko mo co a coger ajíes.

to harvest, to pick (fruit). haho.

they will shoot several arrows at you. wa kãi taitaimai kukeihe.

noise made by falling arrows shot by warrior archers, and by extension, the warrior archers themselves. taitai.

Look. paiki yai.

Look!. paiki.

al llegar desparramaron por el suelo los paquetes de guabinas. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

to scatter multiple sets of objects. yapikirarei.

to scratch oneself by rubbing against. mãriki.

to have a good taste. wãnihiwe.

to divide into several parts. ﬂaka.

we progressed slowly downstream, one after another. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

one after another. hirihãi.

she was going from one place to another and her laughter was always moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

to go from one place to another, not to stay still. reshiprou.

I will become blind. ya hupepirayou.

to become blind. hupepiai.

1. yohemi si.

Fragment of bamboo cane. yohemi.

I have arrived there and live with the others on the rock. kihami ya koketayoma pei maki hami ya peria nareatayoa.

I live with the others on the rock. nareatayoa.

to stop and move alternately. hothotou.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually. iyarariyowei.

shaman who loses. puhi yashuai.

shaman who loses. yashuai.

they killed váquiros and organized a funerary banquet (lit. ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

we two have shot arrows at the váquiros. kamiye yahekini ware yahe ki niyama.

the hekura shot arrows at the daughter of the yawari. taritari ke peni yãwãriyoma pe teepi a niyamahe.

to kill, to shoot with an arrow. niyama.

to turn over momentarily. hatutou.

recently initiated shaman. thamamo.

to receive a basket of food. ni ithãpei.

to receive a basket of food. ithãpei.

to paint red, to become red. momihiã.

he did not go to get his arrow, he ran away immediately in fear. shereka a koãi mai e kiriri yea ha shoariherini (mit.

ran away in fear. shoariherini.

it was because they had not desisted that they kept on groaning one after the other. the pe tiraprai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiataroma.

had not desisted. tiraprai.

the small child that they had taken grew. reiwehei, a patarayoma.

grew. patarayoma.

to have a bulging belly (jokingly): to be pregnant. maka mãihiomi ushuprarou (bromeando): estar encinta.

be pregnant. mamaika-.

the burning breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

to propagate, to spread out (wind, water). pakayuope.

to fill the interior of a hole. wã pawe.

to fill the bottom of. pawe.

to be stingy. noshi ima.

thanks to the light of the moon, it is clear. peripo shni the hiwatuwe.

light of the moon. shni.

I provoked the flight of many paujíes. paruri ya pe shuriramama.

to make flutter; to provoke the flight of numerous birds (during hunting). shuriramai.

to act interestingly to attract the opposite sex. mokomou.

Leaf, tree leaf; plant with leaves. yãã hena Hoja, hoja de árbol; planta con hojas. Pl. Pl. leaves of a plant; set of leaves belonging to the same plant. yãã de su casa; haye yaa ke e si sipo, masiko e ki re h e n a k i: conjunto de hojas pertenecientes a una rere hami yoka horea kure.

arrugó hojas entre las manos y desnudó el suelo con el pie. yãã ke the henaki ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakini.

leaf, foliage, plant with leaves. yãã.

make them make love, their children will be good hunters. pe ta wamomahe, pe pe ihirupi nihitaprope.

to make love. wamomahe.

Ouch!. siri!.

insult each other, you want to discuss and say things frankly. ke kipi ta yahatuayou, pe no wã niya thatai wawetoo shoao kuprei.

insult each other. insúltense.

(in a myth) he cut Moro in two while he was blocked by a fallen tree. shi wãrio.

¿te dejo las sobras. ahe ya shee ta hepei.

to leave leftovers. sheemai.

war. guekerei.

limpiarse la nariz con la uña. fhiyokaki titheo.

perro muerto que pertenecía al hablante. fipa hiyoka.

nose. ﬁyoka.

the two women fled. suwe ke kipi shi wahi ayoherii.

as the woman was in love with him, she fled with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

1. fugitive woman who has abandoned her community and husband (to join a lover or stop being mistreated). 2. to flee, abandon one. wahi.

to inhale a hallucinogen of poor quality (lit.: to deceive the nose). mirãi.

up there the capuchin monkey is resting (= you are not hunting). kiha wisha a wãri ma re wãshimi horupohori.

to catch one. wãshimi horu.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. momo pei shinahe.

cotyledon. shinahe.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini (mit.

to divide something into pieces by pulling with the teeth in one direction and with the fingers in the other. wakoka.

to be hungry. yawatoa.

a stream whose depth level has dropped a lot during the dry season. u wiririprou.

whose flow gradually diminishes as a consequence of drought. wiririprou.

the destructive power of the axe. ayawa koshi.

destructive power. ayawa.

todo el mundo sabe que soy matador de jaguares. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

I am a killer/hunter. niyatimi.

imitate Rashakami. rashakami a ta oweprari.

you have to do like the Shamathari. shamathari wa pe ha owemani.

to imitate, to act like. oweprai.

her daughter appeared, the diadem and the red cotton made her splendid. pe thee a re petariyowei, watoshe peni the no aimoma, mathono peni the no aimoma.

splendid, magnificent. petariyowei.

small earthen vessel. haprua ka umohoru.

to give shelter to someone; to keep an object close to oneself in one. huwepou.

make slightly curved the wall of an object that is being made. wãhetemai.

if you move around making noise like that, people will hear you and shoot arrows at you. minaha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

they will shoot arrows at you. niyaprareihe.

to rub with the fingertips to clean. horokoo.

you name Ayukumariwe, you pronounce its name, do not lie, do not lie. rai ayao, horemotihe, horemotihe.

a spiritual or hallucinatory entity. Ayukumariwe.

they are not many. pe peheriami.

not being many. peheria.

to become loose (knot). prohohoai.

I have malaria. ya hurapi.

to have malaria. hurapii.

to have hunger (terminative). shoeteprou.

there were many people from Mahekoto who snored. mahekoto theri ke pe hohoruã re teteoperei.

snoring. hohoruã.

palm. konopo.

when we get tired of living in the forest we return to the communal dwelling. yamaki periai ha mohipraruni yamaki kooma.

to abandon the communal dwelling to live temporarily elsewhere. periai.

to speak using a speech distinct from the local speech. kahiramo.

to paint, to draw a transverse line on a person or object. oni hahetiai.

to paint, to draw a transverse line on a person or object. hahetiai.

the fire has only caught in certain places. wake nohi ayakelaje.

to burn partially. petación.

come little one (son-in-law), you will lick my fingers (after I have harvested honey). hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape (mit.

Affectionate kinship term used by parents-in-law (male or female) to address their son-in-law. Also used during an initiation or shamanic ceremony.. pusimiwe.

I do not stop telling the truth. ya wã katititao ma re kui.

to tell the truth, to say what one thinks. katititai.

I know it. ya the tai.

to know, to recognize. taa.

these ripe fruits are truly tasty. the wai wake wãnihitawe yai.

1. to become good (quality of an object), 2. to be of good quality, tasty. wãnihi.

upper part, surface. heaka.

a little clear (a tint). fereshi.

I will get a pot in exchange for the arrows. hapokaye ke ya yehiai.

to get a pot in exchange for arrows (lit.: in exchange for arrows I will carry a pot on my back). hapokaye.

we call each other shouting, we call each other. yamaki pokomayoma, yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to shout (once) to call or attract someone; to call the hekura (newly initiated shaman). pokomiãi.

the blue body of Yãmonãmãriwe did not take long to swell. yãmonãmãriwe yetu ke a pata hãepotopi hããi ha kuparuni (mit.

to have swollen, to have inflated, to have dilated. hããrayou.

it was a very good hunting dog and it pursued the tapirs. hiima ke a suhirina, shama ke pe waiamai re totihiowei.

why is it that the chiggers always choose to lodge under the toenails. weti the ha hihu na peni yare mamisi pe no hore waiaprai ayao.

it is him whom I decided to kill. ya waiamar e m a.

1. To persist; to pursue. 2. To refuse, prohibit. 3. To choose a victim (human or animal predator).. waiamar.

to speak. orãmi.

if he obtained at least one, he would stop complaining, he would act as if nothing happened. mori totihiwe ke ya yaupe, ya nakou kotãope mai, ya mohotuo totihiope.

to act as if nothing happened, to be indifferent. mohotuo.

to leave someone in ignorance, to forget to inform someone. mohotumapou.

to grab by the shoulders, to hold by the shoulders. fãkihi.

colic makes (one) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. turekou.

in a short time Lizard felt the effects of the poison and slowly became limp, hanging upside down. yetu re a yuai ha kuparuni, rehariwe a mi wereariayo.

to suffer the effects of a substance (hallucinogenic, poison) or an illness. yuai.

from whom did you receive them. weti iha wa pe rii terema.

you received them. terema.

he has teeth arranged in a very irregular manner (offensive). a naki parerewe.

having teeth arranged in a very irregular manner (offensive). parerewe.

to blaze very brightly. haruharumou.

to deploy (to surround, encircle). horokoprou.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten, to make flat. taha.

como tú no le temes a nada, siempre estás saliendo. wa si no sãiyopiwei ke wa horeprarou ta kupiyeni.

to not fear anything. sãiyopi.

to suck in, to sip (the flesh of a fish bone, the marrow of a bone, the juice of a sugar cane, etc.). ususai.

The Hypoclinea bidens ant is small. Õkohãma resi ã huu.

Hypoclinea bidens (Dolichoderinae). okohãma.

brother-in-law, I'm leaving. shori, ya kuhamii.

to set out, to depart. kuhamiãi.

Oso hormiguero se echó de espaldas para dormir. wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to lie on one. rekekeikuni.

they (two) leaned the palm tree against (a tree). hii ke hi ha yei ke amo shãhe hãthãpikema.

to lean against something. hãthã.

she is pregnant (it is very visible). fa maka oshemi.

she is pregnant (it is very visible). oshemi.

by land (not in a canoe). fwashiri.

me hicieron descansar otra vez en la desembocadura del camino. yo he haope ha yare kãi wãshimi horuu re kopeiwehei.

made me rest again. kopeiwehei.

small yellow, very sweet banana variety. ãsikerimi.

leaf. koe.

to shorten (make shorter) [plural object]. horotoakei.

the mount Poapoa is high. poapoa maki her u w e.

high, elevated. poapoa.

when they were doing that, they dropped (the basket), and it transformed into a rahara monster. thamapii tehe, a ha huhepirini rahara ki pata kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to drop, to let fall. thamapii.

to peel the grains of the yopo plant. hiprushiai.

to place the hand on one side of the face (when lying in a hammock). fnaki theki huweai.

side (of the face). huweai.

I pulverize/grind this (alucinogenic substance). ya e pe hishi ha thaprani.

to pulverize, to grind into powder. thaprani.

as the tapir perceives the reflection of the hunters surrounding it, it starts to walk. yãnomãmi the pe manashi he hãyowe ha shama a pata terekekeherayou.

as the tapir perceives the reflection of the hunters surrounding it, it starts to walk. terekekeherayou.

to tap with the hand, to prepare a hallucinogen by tapping a leaf on which the powder rests, in order to separate the coarse particles from the fine ones. tirikai.

to protect oneself or be protected by a barrier of branches or palm leaves. pesio.

to lose fat, to become thin. romiãi.

arcabuz (arquebuse, an early type of firearm). arakusa.

come here to fan the fire. koa wake ta yareyo.

I'm going to kill the agouti by introducing smoke into its den. opo ya yareprai.

to fan the fire using a flat object (a fan, a blower, a lid, folded leaves, etc.); to asphyxiate an animal by introducing smoke into its den in this way. yaremai.

to be weeding the communal house. shaponomou.

to be weeding the communal house. shaponomou.

above all do not tell them to shoot them with guns (during the attack). kopeta e niyããmãi tikoo mai.

to shoot them with guns. niyããmãi.

(it) bends under the weight. ihiru pe wãri pashokou.

to bend, to yield under a load. ashokoai.

to dry and harden without rotting (a dead log). ãmãrokoprou.

Drink water. Isi pei.

water. isi.

nearby streams. yehihi.

yo poseo un arco untado con resina que está apoyado (contra algo). ipa the nahi sipo tapitapipi ithãpraa hea.

untado con resina. ithãpraa.

to dent or deform by a blow (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). wãukukei.

the fish will be peppery. yuri a nakiprariyo.

to become stronger (noise); to become more pungent, more peppery; to become acrid (smoke). nakeprou.

he pushed aside the logs (at the base of the roof) and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand something obstructing the path; to reject someone with the hand. kreakreani.

I finished polishing the bow. hãto ya nahi hoprarema.

I split the papaya in two. shamakoro ya hakaroprarema.

perfective aspect marker for transitive verbs indicating completion of an action. prare.

desaparezcan inmediatamente. pe ta mratou shoaro.

destruye esto ahora. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

immediately. shoaro.

I placed sticks under the ugly buttocks of the (unborn) child, and Rumirumiyoma wove a basket to enclose it (= I killed the fetus in the mother's womb). kana ke hiki ha ihiru ya posi wãritiwe romaparei kurei, rumirumiyoma ihiru pei ke a pesi ha tiyeaprani.

female spirit associated with cloudy weather and rain; she is the mother-in-law of Titiri, the demon of the night. rumirumiyoma.

the itching manifests in several places. the pe shihiti rãikãi.

manifests in several places. rãikãi.

to have the habit of offering, of giving (to visitors). totohai.

he descended slowly. wapu ke pe ithãopisi a ithorayoma.

descended. ithorayoma.

supernatural being, hekura associated with cold, darkness and storm clouds. ruweriwe.

to massage someone to relieve pain. huteterarei.

her older sister. amiwepi.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and this sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

they cut down trees to collect honey. the nahi thaa ha repa.

to cut down trees. repa.

raíces. kokoki.

they put bark in the colorant to make it fragrant, that's why it's brilliant. fei nana pe e no kapino, e no kapino fa totiﬁoni, ei re e noshi tererewe.

brilliant, shiny, resplendent. totiﬁoni.

to be dirty, stained. fãhi.

to take someone by the arm. aga- iri misi.

to take by the arm. aga-.

como tú no le temes a nada, siempre estás saliendo. wa si no sãiyopiwei ke wa horeprarou ta kupiyeni.

to not fear anything. sãiyopi.

to become disheveled or unkempt. popohoray.

form of shouting of birds when calling their chicks; rejoicing at the return of a loved one. oshemou.

to put hands on someone. mishiãki kahuu.

to put hands on. kahuu.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to put the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekai.

to have opened (the end of a long object). sheteterayou.

to dig deeply, to deepen a hole. tarok.

he destroyed the loins of all the children. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

to take something in its entirety (plural object). haikirarei.

to laugh. wehehe.

to be completely dry, to stop being flooded (completely). washitiprou.

if you are always disputing with them, the Yanomami will take your footprint to make sorcery against you. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi wa the pe hore peyeprai si perihi ihehea ha.

to dispute with someone, to scold, to get angry with someone. peyeprai.

Ouch!. sarai!.

base of a pot. toutami si si ka iyoyo kohomo.

to make a container whose opening is narrower than the base. iyoyai.

to form multiple blisters on someone/something. poshorariyo.

sensation of discomfort (of physical or psychological origin). shesensación de malestar (de origen físico o psicológico).

sensation of discomfort (of physical or psychological origin). shesensación.

they immediately line up the poles (in myth). hiki ithãã shaniniwe ta shoararihe she.

to line up, to align. masisi.

to crack. hãthotho.

to go to extract something using a utensil. hiketaai.

in absoluto eran recientes las cenizas. yupu the ushi pe no wãi weyahamipi no kirii.

intensifier. weyahamipi.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãm a.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. Horomãmi.

to have lost its skin/bark. ukukurariyo.

give me one too. ipa ai ta shererepa.

to divide in two, to separate into two parts. shererepa.

to be dizzy. hipihipi.

to be hungry. shoete.

to return an edge. namo preyukuai.

to return. preyuku.

(he) despiojó (removed lice from) a person passing a comb through their hair. noma pe yakekerarei.

to despiojar (remove lice) by passing a comb through the hair. yakekerarei.

to start crumbling/collapsing. hashishiprai.

Men make the women of their rivals sterile using manaka plant. Hombres manakapiamarei mujeres de sus rivales con manaka ke ki.

to make a woman sterile. manakapiamai.

to place the arms along the body for a moment. wikokotou.

that man from the Horetoi community, whose skin is covered in white patches, intends to attack me with magic. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

a community name. horetoi.

her mother-in-law protected her daughter (by putting her on the roof). yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini: su suegra humapi ha moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

protected her daughter (by putting her on the roof). moyenayoma.

soft, tender, flexible. uhutiti.

to make a circular motion in the water; to clean a container with water by making a circular motion with the hand, to wash a cloth by making that motion; to stir the water in a circle with the foot to make the fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yaprokai.

as they kept committing incest with their daughters, they remained in the dark (= the day did not come). pe thee pe rii hami pe yaweremotii ha kuparuni, pe he titirayoma (mit.

to remain lying in a hammock with one arm bent under the head and legs spread out (ready to get down quickly if needed). peritiparuni.

they felt then a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to worry about someone. haruhuai.

"They are your own burned bones. kahe ke wa ishipe. ", shouted the parrot. werehi a wãri ta no kutarureshini (mit.

burned bones. kutarureshini.

he did not go there even once, and the bow covered with resin remained leaned against (something). mori the huu tao re mai, the hãtopi nahi sipo tapitapipi rakipraa heaa.

to be leaned against, to be propped up. rakipraa.

slightly. parokai.

when the others had left they (two) searched inside the house. e kipi taeo re feapeiwei.

to do something in the absence of others, or after they have left. feapeiwei.

a brief and dry fart like a click of the tongue. tahamou.

they are getting on (a canoe). tikepramou.

the lateral branches of the trees, those that are inclined towards the ground, have hollow fruits. kararu hami re hiki poko mi re weteteawei hami momo ãsi tikowe.

to be naturally directed towards the ground; to be twisted (towards the ground). wetewe.

trees will fall on the path. hiki mohe yoakei.

to fall violently face down. yoakei.

let's put a branch with multiple forks on the tips of our arrows. rãhãrã pema ta hiima.

Branch with multiple forks. rãhãrã.

this rock where he later rested. ware mitifue sobre este peñasco donde luego descansó.

this. ware.

to progressively widen the walls of an object towards the edge while making it (canoe, vessel, basket, etc.). ehetamai.

we will arrive now at the place called Kãmohãwe (downstream). kãmohãwe ha hei tehe pemaki kuaai shoaparekirio.

place name (possibly a river name). kãmohãwe.

if Horonami did not exist, we would be miserable and hungry. horonami a yai kuo maoma, ohiri pemaki no peprarou shoaa.

you know well that I live in a place where there are no "Whites" (foreigners). nape pe perio maope ha ya peria ma re kure.

to not exist, to not be present. maoma.

a little fat, in a slightly large quantity. fprehehe.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma.

the smile froze on his lips. ayaroma.

not having strength in the arms (lit: having the arm light). poko herehewe.

light, not heavy. herehewe.

to be satiated (terminative aspect, sense 2). tikrohoprou.

Jaguar let go and fell. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni.

to let go, release, drop. huheheprou.

they are really pijiguaos of the light-colored variety. frasha auaurimi pe ma re kui.

that which is white, a white thing, a thing of a light color. aurimi.

hizo deslizar a la tortuga de arriba a abajo (y dijo): "¡muérdeme el mentón. totori ke a yohotamai piyeama: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

mentón. werina.

dirt, garbage. shamishami.

the rapasimi fish are full of thorns. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

spiny; to have thorns stuck in the flesh; to be full of thorns (fish). misikipi.

null. kotori.

flower, fruit. weti pei ke wa the ki.

to practice an incision on it. hikoreai.

to align tightly (the strands of a basket). shaninirei.

it's exactly like that. faye minaha.

exactly, precisely. faye.

to leave too much water inside the tobacco when preparing a wad. uweamai.

to boast, to speak boastfully. noka hekai.

to boast, to speak boastfully. hekai.

tomorrow, while you make him play, you will cover him with your excrement. fenaha ke wa ha iriamoni wa wãri shiipimari.

to make someone play, to entertain someone. iriamomai.

I'm going to try it right away. ya the ta wapeprao sho.

First I'm going to test the quality of the malefic product with Tuqueque. rehariwe iha heri ya ki ta wapai pario sho.

to try, attempt, dare; to experience, test, taste; to compare, measure. wapai.

the banana plants did not simply grow little by little, they grew very quickly. kuratha siki no rii teteprou petao mai, siki patai ropaama (mit.

grew. tetetou.

to have the habit of hiding in a particular place, to hide one after another. hithepraai.

I'm going to hit you in the side. pe sherenaki shekei.

to hit someone in the side (lit.: to hit someone in the lung). fsherenaki.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent under the weight of the tapir climbing on it. kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei.

to bend under weight. hithotheprou.

he had crushed a guaritoto plant against the ground. api ke nasiki wai raipraama kurahari (mit.

to crush (plants) against the ground. raipraama.

he turned his head back abruptly towards his daughter. pe thee ke iha a mi yapaprakekirioma.

to turn one. yapakei.

knot in the wood. hi moshoko.

knot. moshoko.

the day did not dawn and the ancestor was already awake. pe the mi harupraroimi totihiwe ha porepore a rãi ha kuparuni.

it does not dawn/it does not reach dawn. harupraroimi.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

to scratch or uncover the ground with the foot repeatedly or continuously. hãrãrumai.

the tábanos (horseflies) have the sucking mouthpart flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to have the end completely flattened (elongated object, stick, etc.). tatahawe.

I'm going to tie the ends of the leaves of the package to be cooked. ya the hãro he ãtetepei.

1. to fix, tie firmly; 2. to tie a headband around the forehead when having a headache; 3. to fold and tie the ends of leaves containing food to be cooked on embers; 4. the state of a package tied in that way to be roasted. ãtete.

walk in a long line (in silence). ponerkuni.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

to be wrinkled, to have wrinkles. rukurãi.

enrollar una hoja a modo de embudo (para sacar agua o para meter algo adentro). yãã hena oshokoreai.

to roll up, to make a funnel. oshokoreai.

a burrow. hitikai.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw snot). hushihipiprou.

to turn the head. oraki frihihiai.

to turn one. frihihiai.

head painted with longitudinal lines traced with the blood of the moon. shiema ãshi shetiti.

to trace a line. shetiti.

come, you all will defend us. hapohe, wamare nohi peyeap e.

as they wanted to protect the women, all the men had mixed with them (in the group on the march). the pe nohi niya hore ha peyeaheni, suwe re pe rii hami wãro re the ki komi re nikererayoheriiwei (mit.

to defend someone, to interpose to defend someone; to go to help, protect someone, attack a person to defend another. peyeai.

the elders always walked behind. pata re pe shiro nohãoma.

to follow, walk behind. nohãoma.

"Where is my part of the loincloth. "weti ipa napeyoma ke a. Did you tear yours in two strips (to offer me one). wa siki sheririprarihawe. ", why don't you say that. ", wa re kutouwei.

why don. kutouwei?.

the leaves are covered with dew. y ã ã pe hena hemaãhupi.

dew. hemaãhu.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

1. to peel the seeds of the yopo plant, 2. to scratch oneself, 3. to separate the two cotyledons of a momo fruit to remove the embryo (which is eaten separately). iprushai.

cooked in water (perfective of factitive). hariamarei.

ashes of the korori hi tree with which the condiment is prepared. korori ushi.

to remain behind for a long time. korotao.

I descended the slope. ya mi weteherima.

descended the slope. weteherima.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. presheshe.

to feel unwell. puhi he tharehewe.

to feel unwell. tharehewe.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

they threw it very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. kukekiriowehei.

to stick, fix against. sutiai.

small brown-haired head. he wai re ashiwei.

small brown-haired head. ashiwei.

if you go I will miss you. wa koo ha pe nohi iyotarei.

to miss, to long for (a person, a lost or stolen object). ushuprao.

shotgun, rifle (lit.: the wood with thunder). tãimi.

mother, do not worry after my departure, tomorrow I go out to cast magic substances (against someone). henaha re ya horeprarorayoherii.

after my departure, tomorrow I go out to cast magic substances (against someone). horeprarorayoherii.

they are not many. pe peheriami.

they are not many. peheriami.

to damage by anger the roof of a dwelling by striking it with a machete or stabbing it with a knife (the blow is struck obliquely in relation to the general orientation of the petioles of the leaves that serve as cover). pakekeai.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe transformed. yetu ke e the ka wai ha weheti, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei (mit.

to narrow, to close (cavity, opening). wãtete.

to receive leftovers. miwathe.

golpear a alguien con el puño durante una lucha ritual. pariki shei.

palometa morichalera; Myleus schomburgkii (Characidae). parometa.

to give various objects during a commercial exchange. pãyerekekei.

in the house the wind blew in a terrifying way. watori yahi ha ke a no kirihoma.

to become terrifying, horrible, repugnant; to be impressive (due to quantity). kirihoma.

it is slightly shiny. the wãisipi mimou tapihiwe.

1. A little greasy (same inflections as tapi). 2. A little shiny, a little shiny (like a surface slightly impregnated with oil).. ftapihi.

(noise, voice) to occur suddenly nearby. wã titetetou.

to occur suddenly nearby (noise, voice). titetetou.

A cool breeze usually blows (in the morning, before dawn). Fwahari a phouo tharei.

to blow (of wind). pou.

Rabipelado hurried to hang his hammock in the open air. nãro a re hakokotakeiwei (mit.

hang (hammock). hakokotakeiwei.

infested with worms. agusamoshohãwe.

to be completely wrinkled or crumpled. ãpretewe.

átenle una correa de corteza en torno a los riñones a mi madre y tómenla del brazo (para guiarla). naye wama poushoku ha okãkini a wãri ta ipipahe.

correa de corteza. okãkini.

to harvest pijiguao fruits. wakewakerimi.

to mix, stir, agitate (liquid) with the fingertips. tikoremai.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. eyeha ke ware wãri yeﬁi, pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

nuca. tuyeai.

to discover immediately, to see at first glance. yakeimi.

to be afraid. teateamo.

fhekura maupi u: immaterial liquid through which shamans purify their patients. fhekura maupi u: líquido inmaterial a través del cual los chamanes puriﬁcan a sus enfermos.

immaterial liquid. fhekura maupi u.

to collide, hit (once). tihekio.

blister. ampolla.

to pass and return. weyoyoweyoyo.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksand attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

sand, sandy beach. mrakamraka.

pavón. pãpou.

they are always crying in the forest (after a mourning period). pe hoyããim i.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

This word is part of various idiomatic expressions. hoyããim.

to happen repeatedly, to repeat. notiai.

puhi. yiki.

habla de río arriba. sikrãpi.

I got sick from the cajaro grease. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not completely in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, I. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

substance (hallucinogen, tobacco, food, etc.); to lose one. wãrimai.

mythical mountain where the hekura go to hunt. rãminami.

he told me to come. yare nakama.

they asked Scorpion to go (in a myth). suhirina a nakamahe: "kaheni the ta niyapraayo.

to call someone, to tell someone to come, to claim something from someone, to invite, to request, to demand. nakataai.

they intend to go to war, but they lie (because they are cowards). ya naiki thao.

he will go to look for meat for his father-in-law. pe the pe shiipi naiki thao totihiope re.

to be in search of meat; to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. thaope.

quickly, he hung the hammock he was carrying in the open air, and lay down for a while. thoo thoku re yehiponowei the ki ha hakokotakini a peritaoma.

hung/suspended his hammock in the open air. hakokotakini.

to squat to defecate (human, animal). thopohoai.

to hang. he hatete.

to leave something to become deformed or hardened like leather. prihãmai.

Hokotoyoma had her hair cut regularly around her head (like a Yanomami woman). hokotoyoma ke the he wai yoothowe totihio yaioma.

to have hair growing back in the place of a tonsure. yoothou.

flap wings without flying (a bird). yathethai.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal). ipi.

to hang at a low height and become distended. tirorai.

to cut transversely; to paint or mark with transverse lines. faheti.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to tear off a piece by pulling in one direction with the teeth and in the other with the fingers; an object from which a piece has been torn off in this way. wakokoa.

to fill up to the top. iyekeai.

to become short, to shrink (terminative aspect). hokataprou.

a wasp stung me. kopinani yare tikarema.

a mosquito stung me. ukushini yare tikarema.

stung. tikarema.

to be always. shoaaprarai.

to be heard for a moment (noise). yaweretou.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise. yimika.

to be decorated with semicircles. rukekewe.

to have wrinkled buttocks. ruwe.

the fish jump out of the water one after the other, they jump out of the water. yuri ke ki he ruhupraai, pe ki he ruhou totihio.

to jump out of the water (a fish). ruhu.

onomatopoeia, noise produced when blowing hallucinogenic through a tube into someone. shoi!.

to soften smoked game meat by cooking it in water; to soften something rigid, to soften bark. uhutamai.

to become a widow; to lose one. shirokoprou.

edible fruit of the koteko hi tree. koteko.

to disperse to make a search or hunt. ãkoko.

to cause suffering. ninimarei.

dry stream. hashiCaño seco.

dry stream. hashiCaño.

to kick, reject someone by kicking; to knock down, damage or destroy something by kicking (a round object). kahathoai.

to become viscous or sticky. yoreriyo2.

to produce whirlpools in the water with one. kapoyo.

you (plural), the ones who live there (in different places), you do nothing but lie. kihami wamaki re perihii wamaki hore kashiwe.

you (plural) who live in different places. perihii.

to cut in a circular manner, to remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimonene.

stubbornness, obstinacy. yatiwe.

to predict that, to foretell. ihita.

I speak. opoporema ãhu.

to speak. opoporema.

Rabipelado ya estaba lejos cuando pensó: "¡y si volara. nãroriwe a payeketao waikiwe tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

fly. perayou.

it may be new (the knife) but it does not cut much. a ma tutewei a peheri namomi.

does not cut much. namomi.

to give. pihimo.

I will cut down the large trees, then clear the undergrowth, and finally burn it all (myth). wa ha kayapamoruni, wa the wake yea fa mahirini, ihi re the ishi ha kuratha wa si tia.

to cut down large trees. kayapamou.

by the river the path deviated. poko u ha yo tiwaroma.

to deviate, to go around. tiwaroma.

someone. alguien.

he offered the back of his knee (and said): "bite me here". a mathami totoma: "eyeha the ta wetiki".

back of the knee. mathami.

their corpses were strewn on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

scattered, strewn (perfective, plural object). tikukurariyo.

Rabipelado glanced (towards the scene that was unfolding). nãroriwe the re mitareiwei.

to glance, to take a quick look. mitarei.

not fear receiving blows, face an adversary, present oneself after a threat to defy the one who made it. shemokei.

to scratch oneself with nails; to scratch (inadvertently). si tikokoo.

to scratch someone several times. si tikokai.

to scratch oneself with nails; to scratch (inadvertently). tikoko.

the pijiguaos start to become large. rasha ke ki primomou.

to start to become large (pijiguaos). primomou.

you have avenged your relative (by killing a person who belongs to the same community as the killer). e naha re a hiima kuwe wama a koã waikirema.

to take revenge, avenge a death. fhiima.

to be full. omopotu.

he cleared the way by pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand; to reject someone with the hand; to clear the way by pushing aside something obstructing the path. hãipraai.

to approach the edge of a stream. f kasi iheteai.

to move towards the end of something, to place oneself at the end of something. iheteai.

let the children roll in the mud here. ihiru ke the pe wai sheyeo heai.

to roll on the ground, to throw oneself. sheyeo.

Stagnant water contained in natural holes with more or less vertical walls. shiokore u.

tree (unidentified). shiokore.

the Yanomami shamans who live in different places. yãnomãmi the ki wãri hekura re periprai.

to live (in different places). periprai.

He grabbed a liana, with which he bent the small tree, which ended up leaning against the large tree. thoo thotho a ha yãkãreni hii ke hi itutua ahetea ha totihikini.

to bend or fold objects by inclining or folding them. itutu.

we shot (arrows) at them and they cried: "hokiã. the ha niyakini : "hokiã. hokiã. hokiã. ". ", e pe kuma.

alarm cry. hokiã.

to heal, to get better. puhi wahuai.

to heal, to get better (health state). wahuai.

scattered embers in the field, burned land ready for planting. yãrãrema no.

to become less concentrated, less thick. rehereprou.

(antonym). hiwatu.

I took the fish out of the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

to take out several objects from a canoe. hashiramai.

lagoon that extends downstream. u thookoro.

to become shallow, to decrease in depth. resikei.

when he recovers consciousness, he will start climbing again. a harou tehe a tuo kope.

to recover consciousness (after fainting or being under the effect of a hallucinogen). harorayou.

to start making sharp or rough. namoprai.

I'm going to take this woman as wife. ya amishi ta koo sho.

to take a wife (specifically for the wayamou ceremony). famishi.

to start drying or smoking (something) over a fire. tetekeprai.

the mountain Shãshãpiwei whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

a mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. Shãshãpiwei.

cacao grains. anamoku.

to shake, to move abruptly. kipramai.

I plug the hole. ya theka kahuai.

Who will plug the hole. wetini theka kahuap e.

to obstruct an orifice, to plug a hole. kahuap.

to shorten, to shrink. hokataai.

the hekura strangle me. yare orãmi hiyãihe ke.

strangle. hiyãihe.

the people of tayari theri shot many arrows from far away. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikãihe.

shot many arrows. tishikãihe.

I will mix the bark of the mãrã sihi tree with the aphrodisiac kumi and use it (when I am very close to her). kumi ya rii fa feshiprarini, mãrã ya siﬁ fa feshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

balsam of tolu tree, Myroxylon balsamum (Fabaceae). mãrãpi.

driguera. makeukeu.

women, I beg you to all participate in this activity. suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in an activity. haikiprou.

to let die. tokumarei.

to threaten with a gesture (in earnest or in play). nakuyeprai.

the woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now. mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma.

to dry, to become dry (of a wet object). washiti.

to redden locally by the action of the sun. hetetai.

to paint, trace a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch once transversely. tipruturei.

to start hitting someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikiprai.

a nami kiããi shoawe: it would seem that it is still moving (= it would seem that it is still alive). a nami kiããi shoawe: se diría que aún se mueve (= se diría que todavía está vivo).

to move, to stir. ki.

to shiver, tremble. rutarutaai.

it wrinkles, it creases. si wãikiãi.

it has wrinkled, it has creased (terminative). si wãikiprou.

to wrinkle, to crease, to deform, to wilt. wãiki.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to start lifting and moving objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. hãshãeprai.

to dominate someone habitually during a confrontation (a game or a fight). kanamou.

they built a footbridge over the river. pei ke u ka ha ihirãki ke ki thamahe.

to build a footbridge to cross a stream. ihirãmou.

as they wanted to protect the women, all the men had mixed with them (in the traveling group). the pe nohi niya hore ha peyeaheni, suwe re pe rii hami wãro re the ki komi re nikererayoheriiwei.

to defend, protect. peyeaheni.

he wears a necklace of beads around his neck. tope ki harepou.

a thing worn around the neck. hareotima.

to burn carelessly. hisiki.

in the place where I have the habit of going to fetch water. mãu ya u re yakepraaiwei hami.

to have the habit of going to fetch water at a certain place. yakepraaiwei.

following Woman-palm the songs go towards here. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

follow, accompany someone in a movement. rereimahei.

to start to spread. wã he hãyoprou.

to spread, to divulge (information, words said). wã he hãyoãi.

blue, bluish; violet (color). ushiushi.

put them there, there where there are many of them. kihami pe ta kutaru, pe re komãrãhãri hami.

where there are many of them. komãrãhãri.

this one who lives like a 'White' person (ceremonial dialogue). napepe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

this one who lives like a . napepe.

to lift an empanada. ãrãnã ãreke.

to lift, to raise. ãreke.

to have breathed rapidly, to have been panting. hereheremorayou.

to produce whirlpools in the water with the foot to make things on the bottom surface, to search in that way for moriche fruits that fall into the water. kapokosin.

we entered the water one after the other. yamaki mi hetutayou re kupariyowei.

1. To arrive at a communal dwelling by paths that take opposite directions. 2. To do something one after the other.. hetutayou.

I was about to fall. ya mori kerayoma.

he was about to go. a mori huma.

the Shamathari were about to succeed in killing me. shamathari pe wãrini yare mori shea totihiremah e.

to be about to, to be on the verge of. wãrioma.

she desired to prepare the tobacco in another fire. shomi yãno ha nahe niya ha yaani.

other, different. yaani.

you gave (to each one) two objects. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru momo oshe pe ma kui riha.

to take, give or receive two objects at a time. yãhuei.

to loosen the string of a bow. prehumakei.

to be full of. mãthoyãhipi.

the husband lay down without waiting, he then saw the two gallinetas. pe heãropi e ha peritaikuni, hãshimo e kipi tararema.

to lie down without waiting. peritaikuni.

una. surisurimi.

the ancestors had brought poles dragging them (to rebuild the house), they had cleaned the floor. porepore ke pe tãrãrãmou yaioma, the roshi thaamai yaioma.

to drag, to trail along the ground. tãrãrãmou.

to have a numb limb, to feel tingling. potete.

he wants to go live elsewhere, what does he have against me. yare thapi heiaprarai, weti ke the no peshiri ha thaani.

why do you feel resentment towards my mother-in-law. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

to feel regret or resentment for the loss of an object (lost, stolen, broken); to hold a grudge or resentment towards someone. peshiri.

to become slippery (inside of an object), terminative aspect. takraprou.

my father and I stop when we reach the middle of the river. haye sho peishoki u ha yaheki hore upraa ayapariyo.

we tie the arrows together (in their middle part). shereka ke yama pe poushoku pata re thaamaperei.

middle, center. ayapariyo.

the Waika, down there, kill many cotingas. kihi waika a re perirati, ei a no eimipi re sheorati.

cotinga. eimipi.

confront each other only with sticks, do not tie knives to the tips. pe ta wapayo, hii ke hi shironi, sipara wama si hiihãi mai.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. hiihãi.

he gave ripe plantains to some and others. kuratha re ke ki wake hipea ha shetekeapotuni.

divide, split, separate a part from a whole. shetekai.

the hole in his earlobe is small. pe the yimikaki ka wahakewemi.

he was really tiny, but his penis was gigantic. pei ke the wai wahakemi ma yaii, pei ke the mo pata kua ha yairaruni (mit.

small, tiny; to be few. wahakemi.

to tie a fishing line to a branch (to catch catfish at night). fãsitha karoramai.

to fish by tying a fishing line to a branch. karoramai.

it becomes less dense, it becomes thinner, it clears (low vegetation). noshi takakaai.

to become less dense, to become thinner, to clear (low vegetation). takakaai.

to take several parts of a whole. shetekeararei.

Its bark is very flexible and separates in one piece. araturi usi.

canelo tree; Croton matourensis (Euphorbiaceae). araturi.

the pathogenic principle that affects a sick person and he sucks it out (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). ihini principio patógeno que afecta a un enfermo y yare niya prapoma (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to suck out by suction. pehi hoo.

I will sharpen the sticks. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (plural objects). yakekeprarei.

war. guekerei.

did they kill one of our own. fyare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to kill one of our own. fyare.

to make deep. taroamai.

one and the other sat down and ate the fish. ke kipi re rokeiwei, yuri ke ki re wapiarareiwei.

they ate fish. wapiarareiwei.

here, in this place, had received a deep wound in the chest. eyeha ke totihi, pei ke pariki hami ke the ka pata ha wãyãkãoperei.

had received a deep wound. wãyãkãoperei.

separate several strips (of bark) from this tree. wa e natha ki ha hiririprarini.

to separate several strips (of bark). hiririprarini.

if you participate often in a collective hunt you have to make them place you in the center of the group. pruka re wamaki rãmi re huuwei, mi ãmo ha re wa re romapareiwei.

to make someone be placed in the center. romapareiwei.

I just expelled the evil that was inside you (shaman speech). ya the wayu hoyarei kuroi (cha.

to expel the pathogenic principle from the body of a sick person. wayu hoyai.

the tobacco is more or less large. nahe kumamasi.

relatively large tobacco plant. kumamasi.

to have a desire for. naikaai.

(myth): the leaves of the shãpinama shrub are abundant. yaharaa (mit.

a shrub; Sorocea muriculata (Moraceae). shãpinama.

to be hidden. hithethe.

to clean a gun barrel or tube in that manner. mi ka tiprokoai.

to clean a gun barrel or tube by moving a long stick back and forth. tiproka.

to be locally that color, to be totally that color. momihi.

to separate definitively from the community to go live elsewhere. shekereprou.

the mosquito reye gorged itself with blood. reye a pata makarayoma.

to be stuffed, to be gorged (with food or blood). makarayou.

to go down a slope. wetei.

to surround, to encircle. hithoroko.

there is a wasp nest in the waterfall, we (you and I) will go burn it. pora ke a ha kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

we will burn. hisikayorupe.

to deploy (in order to surround, encircle). ithorokoprou.

to hold each other by the shoulders during a hunting ritual (heri). hãkihiprawe.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiapraro.

to hurry, to rush, to move quickly. haiapraro.

to become shiny, to become iridescent (terminative aspect). terereprou.

to cut in a circular manner, to remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimoneneãi.

when they discover a giant cachicamo, they will asphyxiate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

they will asphyxiate it with smoke. yareprapehe.

to spread, to divulge (news, gossip). t wã hayoãi.

to spread, to divulge (news, gossip). hayoãi.

they were not upset, they did not argue, they were well. pe hushuonomi, pe hiranomi, the pe topratioma.

to scold, argue, rebuke; to curse. hiranomi.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

1. To untie or loosen all the time. 2. To flee, escape, dodge during an attack.. hihoatarou.

the little one suckled (from his mother's breast). ihiru ke a wai hesi hoturoma.

to suckle (a baby). hoturoma.

while this is really soft. pe te hi pe epehewe.

to soften, to become soft. epehe.

to curl up, coil up, roll up in a spiral. akreteai.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their heads in the water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

putting the head in the water. kaoayoma.

game animals. nini waiamai.

prey. waiamai.

although it is very far away, get me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. mithari.

the ancestors committed many incests. weremou no motaai ha yaiikuni.

committed. yaiikuni.

to have the habit of regularly inhaling hallucinogens, to be a shaman. epenapi koo, frec.

shaman. chamán.

the cats were satiated. mishi pe petirariyoma.

they were filled/satiated. petirariyoma.

he hurried to burn the bees with burning leaves, broke the nest, dropped it, and slid down the tree trunk. yetu oi a ha hisikiparuhuruni, a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai kukema.

to drop, let fall. kemarini.

to draw a transverse line. yãprutakei.

they went to kill fish and araka upstream. ora hami yaraka re pe shei mi huprou kupemahe.

to kill fish. kupemahe.

dispersed to do a search or hunt. rãkokokei.

to be happy. hããhããmi.

tibia. furokopi.

edible fruit of the kãyuweshirimi hi shrub. kãyuweshirimi.

Plural form of pisiri. rihuuku pisiri.

Mythological example using pisiri/rihuupi to refer to a blowgun. ira a naikiripi taema ma kui, a tapralrihu ke a ha tikene, lo buscó sin encontrarlo; a hushuoripi mohe.

1. Supernatural plant whose stem is hollow and has transverse partitions like bamboo. Fierce wasps live next to this plant. The hekura and yawari cut them for use. The hekura have them in their throats and through them they spit beads (tope) and magical substances. 2. In mythological stories, it designates a blowgun or a more or less long pipe with which magical substances are blown at adversaries.. pisiri.

(after having been moving slowly) he started to run quickly. hayariwe ke poko siki hoã ha hairápido.

to execute a task quickly. hairápido.

to place. wari-.

she was called Honey Woman and was very beautiful. yãmonãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a wãri kuoma.

Honey Woman. Mujer-miel.

you two lie here in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

lying one next to the other in opposite directions (with heads at opposite ends) in a hammock. yotepramou.

brother, above all don't go to that place. wãri fuu kuikuhe.

over all, above all, especially. -tihe.

to be hungry. weehe.

río abajo, en el conuco, no hay realmente sino dos racimos cortos de plátanos. porakapi kuratha ke kipi wai onohowe yaua totihia kupiyekiri.

to shorten something. onohoãmãi.

(he/she) did it in the dwelling. wã tetepei.

to do something in the dwelling (e.g. cry for a dead person, threaten repeatedly, fight and threaten). tetepei.

a term related to the words . himomo.

to have a numb limb, to start feeling a tingling sensation. poteteai.

to press against each other, to squeeze together. hisini.

when the outsiders had finished eating the Yanomami, they threw their bones outside. nape peni yãnomãmi the waa ha hititireni, sipo ha the upe ripemahe.

when they had finished eating the Yanomami, they threw their bones outside. ripemahe.

forked branch. fhiki pakaraa.

tree branches. fhii hiki p o k o.

branch. fhiki.

to become thin. henasiãi.

I would cry if you went away. wa taprou mararu ya miã ikipe.

to go away, leave. mararu.

I'm going to look for wood with the others. koã ya ãsho narei.

to participate in an activity to obtain part of the product of that activity; to request or obtain part of the product of an activity. nare.

it took us a long time to climb the last part of the trail, and when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain. hesikaikutuni.

my fireplace is next to an exit. ipa yãno nanokaa.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. nanokao.

to disappear in the vegetation. theaai.

keep your bow tensed. nahi ta iyopou.

to tense a bow, to keep a hammock hung up. iyopou.

we went together to gather the firewood we needed (to cook) at the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

to do it (a collective work) in a precise place or on a precise surface (perfective aspect of the durative). pathothorarei.

they have ambushed along the path, that's what he wants to say. yo ka mamo noﬁ reparihe, a niya kuu yaro.

they have ambushed along the path. reparihe.

he was walking in the lead. ya the no ihipirei kurei, the ha pariparuni.

in the lead, at the front. pariparuni.

to squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to extract the juice of a fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held with the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. ãhuhuãi.

to have removed the surface layer of an object by scraping with the edge of an instrument. shorerekei.

they removed the leaves in which they had cooked the fish. yuri pe hãro mi hapei re kupeiwehei.

to untie, to open a package. mi hapeai.

a concave mark (due to a fold, a blow or pressure). wãhihou.

to have cold. wahatu.

después de una corta ausencia, él franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda trayendo una cesta llena de frutos momo. momo ke pe pata thari ha yehireni, the horetou re korayouwei.

he franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda trayendo una cesta llena de frutos momo. korayouwei.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or a magic substance). hehetai.

the two women sat slowly on the edge of the hammock, then one of them lay down next to it. ke kipi re tipeariyouwei, yetu ai ke a re yakakeiwei.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock. yakakeiwei.

él guardaba la sustancia maléﬁca debajo de su guayuco y se apresuró a preparar la pequeña ﬂecha de bambú (con la cual debía lanzar esta sustancia). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

hay poca miel, y los nidos están aprisionados en las horcaduras de los árboles. pei u pe wai hãkikiwe.

esa pequeña cosa que se lleva apretada entre el guayuco y la piel (un cuchillo), yo he traído este arco para canjearlo. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei (habla de río arriba.

to carry something tucked or wedged between something else. hãkiki.

that one to whom the mouth of X calls father. X kahiki re hiimouwei.

one to whom the mouth of X calls father. hiimouwei.

I paint myself on the face. mi hiporoshio.

to paint oneself on the face. hiporoshi.

fried banana slices. kuratha hãrikã no.

fried food, ready to be consumed. hãrikã.

to be better for a moment. manahetou.

when it became completely day many bees started conversing. pe the haruu hititiprou tehe puu nari pe ã pruka re wayorayouwei.

the men stayed chatting (after the women left). wãro pe ã wayou heoma.

I conversed with both. ya kipi ã wayomama.

1. To chat, converse; to say 2. Used metaphorically: to make love with someone. wayou.

to invite a person whom one pretends to be a friend in order to kill them. nomohoriãi.

I will kill all the animals and exterminate all the people. ira a si ahimai totihio tehe, poshotomi ke a wai huhetariyoma.

I will exterminate. huhetariyoma.

to cut across, divide transversely, paint or mark with transverse lines. hahatho.

to hang one. hehãtããi.

the warriors imitate the jaguar, they yell. wayu peni ira pe owemaihe, pe nosiyeãmou.

they imitate the jaguar, they yell. owemaihe.

to become hairy. koiãi.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk. waroroprou.

to fragment a bone into several pieces by splitting it with a knife or machete, for making arrowheads (perfective, plural object). tikarorarei.

the base of a flat basket. yorehi si kohomo.

base of a container or basket. sikomi.

they are well scattered everywhere. temi the pe hiraprawe.

there is blood scattered in various places (of the forest). iyeiye re pe nohi hirawe kui.

to be scattered, to be gathered (in different places); to live in, to inhabit different places. hirawe.

do not bathe here, do it farther away. miha a yãrimotihe, thapi ha ke wa yãr i m o p e.

farther away. yãrimotihe.

he/she has a protruding belly. shipreteprou.

to be pot-bellied, to have a protruding belly. shiprete.

to tear or cut a strip at the edge or incompletely. sheririkei.

give me a bamboo tip, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to do it with a basket (the deceased is a woman). wii no kãi preaprarou.

to raise and lower the arms. yoko.

to hang upside down (perfective form). ihohoray.

to pour the crushed bones of a deceased male into gourds. fãhuku he okãpei.

bones of a deceased male relative. fãhuku.

the egg of the gallineta that you cooked (at a certain time of the day). hãshimo wa nathe re hariprei.

it is what I said (a moment ago). ya wã ma re haprei.

it was here a moment ago. haprei.

to come loose; to detach. hayo.

noise made by a more or less hard object inside a rigid container when shaken: noise of lechosa seeds, noise of chicks in the egg when shaken, etc.. rokorokomou.

to divide into several parts. koperarei.

to be partially dry, to stop being locally flooded. washitii.

I'm going to wash myself properly with soap (lit. moshimoshi peni ya ta yãrimou ta pashio sho.

foam. shimoshi.

they killed him and left. a ha sheriheni pe korayoma.

they killed him. sheriheni.

to help me fight the demon that is in the sick person. ya sipararithawe descienhushomi.

to help me fight the demon that is in the sick person. descienhushomi.

when the day arrived, when the dawn began to rise, he woke him up. mi ka wãhepe ha ya the re pomiã shoakeiwei.

to begin to rise (of the dawn). wãhepe.

he took a large stone, as wide as that. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

to widen, to extend (a surface), to expand. rerahaai.

small partridge; Tinamus guttatus (Tinamidae). yowehemi.

to become concave on the outside, to hollow out a gourd to make a container. wapoko.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). huku.

to go to live in the forest. ãmoprou.

to be happy. ãyãyuma.

the wood is dry. koã ãsho washitiwe.

on dry land, out of the water; by land (not in a canoe). fwashiti ha(mi).

to become dry, to stop being flooded (land). wãtetãi.

he introduced into it a dart. wãhã yuprou: hetukeiwei.

to introduce into it a dart. hetukeiwei.

he gets angry only with his wife. pe suwepi ke iha a kahiki shiro kushetou.

to open the mouth (of an animal), to part the lips (to speak); to threaten the weak and remain silent before others. kushetou.

to have the skin dyed with a light red varnish obtained from onoto. shopohamou.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to fall and scatter on the ground (fruits), to spread out on the ground. yapikou.

to keep a person immobilized by holding their arms against their body. okokomapou.

to form longitudinal folds. wãukuãi.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to have the head covered with white down. foroi.

he transported the large stone again on his shoulder. maa ke ma pata yarukepou kooma.

1. To carry, transport on the shoulder. 2. To maintain compression. yarukepou.

I look at my face in the mirror. mire ke a ha ya moheki m i o.

to look at. wãshiki.

the váquiros were approaching us. ware ke ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

I did not see (the enemy warriors) carrying the little girl (who they had just kidnapped). suweheri ya wãri yehia taprai ma re maoperei.

I was looking, the. ya mamo shatioma, rahaka ke peki re puruhuoperei.

It is a verb suffix indicating remote past imperfective aspect combined with epistemic modality. perahei.

to tremble for a moment. rayukuprou.

hurry up to build a scaffold. m athakari pe ta thai hairaruhe she.

hurry up, rush. hairaru.

to have reddish reflections (locally). wahehou.

a type of tree in the Caryocaraceae family. ryocar.

word. ushiriwe.

ithore 2 vb. ithore 2 vb. trans. trans. t ithoreamai, caus. t ithoreamai, caus. : to curve, to bend something. : curvar, doblar una cosa.

to curve. curvar.

fruits. ãhuku.

Siroromi skinned the man who was screaming in vain from pain. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to scream in pain. eaimo.

it just passed behind Mount Teriope. teriope ke ki hami a ãyorii kuhe (mit.

to put behind, to put towards the back; to pass behind. ãyoriãi.

to start doing this for a moment. u shimoretou.

to make whirlpools (the water). shimoremou.

I have acne on my face. ya mi pe shohepi mo.

acne. shohe.

to become soft, to sink, to deform. wihihiai.

I don't have a quid of tobacco under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a quid of tobacco under the upper lip. hiiai.

1. To live without ceasing in different places. 2. To lie awake without being able to sleep.. shimakao.

to be slightly wet on the surface. urerehe.

to divide, split, distribute in several parts. pashihai.

to inhale drugs through the nose, holding them in the palm of the hand or with the fingers. fepena ukukuãi.

to smoke a cigarette (neologism). fsikariyo ukukuãi.

to smell, sniff, inhale (once). ukukãi.

to receive a piece, a part. ayakosipei.

skins put out to dry in various places. pehui.

the snakes will move away (said when one does not want to leave too early in the morning). oru ke ki kasikope.

I'm not going to the forest, I'm not leaving the collective dwelling (to go live elsewhere). urihi hami ya huimi, ya kasiproimi.

to approach the edge, to go to the periphery. kasiai.

progressively widened towards the edge (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). eheterayou.

no, I don't eat that. maa, ya the waimi.

to eat. waimi.

the path, the way. gilan el camino.

the path, the way. gilan.

the jaguar was dragging the dead woman along the ground while the child was perched on the tree. irani suwe ke a nomawe re shaireheriiwei, ihiru a ma tikeo tehe.

dragging by pulling along the ground. shaireheriiwei.

encarámense (sobre la plataforma) uno al lado del otro. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to crouch lined up one next to the other, to line up one next to the other. rãyoã.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

small, to scratch or uncover the ground with the foot to . hãrãrurei.

"Look at what they are doing. "e naha pe kuaai ta tharei. ". ".

Look at what they are doing!. tharei!.

perfective form. momarei.

to injure oneself with the tip of a sharp object. hiio: lastimarse con la extremidad de un objeto puntiagudo.

to place at the end. hii.

you don't have to inhale the leaves of these plants, they belong to the y a w a r i. henape koai mai, yawari pe yããpi hena (cha.

leaves from different plants. henape.

Ardilla retomó aliento en un bejuco que colgaba en forma de zarcillo. maari ke thothoku tishokoope ha, wayapashiriwe ke a wãri wãshimi horuma.

hung in an arched shape. tishokoope.

to prevent touching or grabbing something, to prohibit the use or consumption of something. wãmai.

she entered the dwelling and returned to her mother without anyone noticing. pe nii ke iha a horea re hãthokeiwei (mit.

returned without being noticed. hãthokeiwei.

they convinced him to undergo the ritual of homicides. the kãi unokaimomai k u p e r e i.

to undergo the ritual of homicides. unokaimomai.

to install oneself repeatedly in the lower part of temporary shelters when moving through the forest. shikãt.

the cassava plants fell off, detaching from the root. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

to fall off, detaching from the root. poruprou.

baskets full of momo fruits. n cestas llenas de frutos momo.

(type of fruit). momo.

to boast about one. himomarei.

the noise suddenly became very loud. wã hirekeprou.

to suddenly become very loud (noise). hirekeprou.

to bruise in one place. wãokãi.

he will carry only a machete. sipara ke a pou yawereoheripe.

to do something alone or in an isolated manner, to carry a single object. yawereoheripe.

el hombre llegó a un lugar donde vivían espíritus. emãmi a warokema.

llegó a un lugar. emãmi.

to clean or polish completely. shutukaherei.

to crush, to squash. pathethe.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will certainly say that (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

there where he is, at a distance from us. kuyahuni.

he is afraid. misi ãkiãkimo.

to be afraid. ãkiãkimo.

he unties the canoe. kanawa a ta kusheprari.

he untied the hammock (that he was carrying on his back), and lay down. yii theki a ha kusherini a perioma.

to untie, to unbind, to detach. kusherei.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially carved the shrub trunk. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to partially carve or chisel. eshehemakema.

tadpole. shiotorema.

bones. anjeros.

to erase footprints so that they cannot be used for sorcery. fmãyo he rao.

very recent footprint, still wet footprint. fmãyo here.

they were following the footprints. pe mãyo nosi teaprarai kuaamahe.

footprint, trail, track. fmãyo.

to construct a camp or shelter near people already settled. fperia.

he ate everything and returned home in a state of being a killer and being satiated. a unokai ha kopoherini, petiri.

to return home in a state of being a killer and being satiated. kopohoroni.

to start vibrating, to start experiencing small shakes. tirikiprou.

to remove, undo, take off. ukuku.

he took down the basket abruptly and carried away in it the living child. wii ke a pata ha hayutareni, ai ke a temi re titireheriiwei.

to carry an object contained within another. titireherii.

dense, impenetrable (vegetation). rasisiwe.

hekura associated with the tips of piasaba (Arecaceae) palm. piakanariwe.

to have big eyes. wayahorowe.

is that true. dad es cierto.

is that so? (surprise, doubt). yai?.

they felt a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to fear, to worry, to be anxious. haruhu.

to cut circularly the damaged part of a food; to remove a hot food from boiling water by stirring the liquid in a circle to make the solid rise to the surface. yakoreprai.

to stir a liquid circularly using a stick, particularly something that is cooking. yakoreai.

to cry for a deceased person while walking on one of the paths they used to take when alive. f pei yo nohi ohete thaai.

to cry for a deceased person while walking on paths they used to take. ohete.

on the face of the old woman they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. suwe ke the pata mamo kasi wãri oniprai ha yairoheni.

eyelid; edge of the eyes. oniwei.

we advanced slowly in a line. fririhoherima.

we advanced slowly in a line. fririhoherima.

and for that reason he remained on guard. the no tapotima.

to recover consciousness, to come to one. tapotima.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoiku.

to embrace, to hug. waporoa.

desire to eat meat. naiki.

the people of the capuchins climbed in great number a bejuco de cadena, the people of the white monkeys did the same. rasirasi thotho hami wishari pe pruka tuketayoma, hoashiri pe sho pe pruka isia pariketayoma (mit.

some climbed quickly to the roof posts. ai rope pe tuoproma, totahima pe hami.

hold on tightly while you climb. wa tuo tehe a ta rohothoiku.

to climb, to scale. toreke.

to start putting a handle on something, using a split stick and binding to attach it; to start wedging something into a fork. haoprai.

he will go behind the dwelling, he will go to the forest. hei ya shikãpi re rere hami, hei ai yoka re horere.

he, she, it. hei.

to paint/draw transverse lines on multiple objects. tipruturarei.

to take something out of someone. yahaye.

I harvest tobacco (cutting the petiole with the nails). pee ya nahe tirii.

while his mother-in-law was hurrying to split long thin sticks to place on the roof, he went to look for (cutting them with his nails) leaves (to cover the roof). pe yesini hurohuro e ki kea ha ropareni, yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini.

to cut with the nails, to harvest tobacco in that way, to tear off leaves by sticking the nails in, to disembowel caterpillars by opening their abdomen with the nails. tirii.

tell this one to do it. hei ke a ta nosiyemahe.

to order, to request a favor (for another). nosiyemar.

to buzz. tereremou.

I'm going to break firewood by kicking it. koã ya ãsho kahekirarei.

hold him down on the ground, I'm going to break his kidneys with a heel strike. mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo ya mi wãri ta kahekipra ke.

to break under the weight of something (a rigid object). kahekiprou.

tree. Mouriria.

(he/she/it) let drift, caused to flow (perfective). karemai kukei.

1. To let drift with the current, to fish by letting floats drift; to cause or allow water to flow. 2. To assist in the departure of people going by canoe.. karemai.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. yashokamai.

to position oneself at the stern of a canoe to steer it; to take control of a motor vehicle (neologism). koro teai.

I approached the luña. etemakema: me acerqué al luña.

I approached the luña. etemakema.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to make war on each other. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to be always at war. iyãtããi.

do it using force. a ta rohothori.

to strengthen, to make firm. rohothorei.

to keep someone seated in a hammock (usually a child). tipemapou.

Where do you live. weti ha wa yãã.

The shaman's hammock was hung there. riyehewe tohoopi thoku yãoma.

to have a hammock hung in a place, to live (in a place). yãã.

the doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to give many injections to someone during a medical treatment (neologism); to shoot many times at a target when practicing with a bow (jokingly). tereshãpraheni.

sorocuá; el término se aplica a dos especies: Trogon viridis y Trogon violaceus (Trogonidae). shotokookoomi.

extend the head for a moment to look. hiyãhãtou.

they shot arrows at the aggressive jaguar. ira ke a waitheri niyai ha kuparuheni.

where are you, brave man. waitheri weti hami pei wa the no mãyo ta kuta ke.

brave, aggressive, stoic. waitheri.

we dispersed slowly and when we walked in parallel rows, we stopped. yamaki mi opi yoããherima, yamaki mi ha yoikuni, yamaki uprat a r i y o m a.

to disperse, to spread out (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããherima.

foggy, misty, blurred, obscured. hukosi.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihiãi.

tears. usiki.

he offered him a recipient filled with plantain. poreaweni tate u pe ithãkema.

to offer. poreaweni.

they did not think of ambushing on the plain at dusk. weyate, heyari ha yamaki ha ta yereiku, the pe kuu mai.

I arrived at dusk and slept. weyate re ya ha koponi ya mioma.

evening, dusk. weyate.

to scream in pain. hiyohiyomo.

I am crippled with pain. no kiwema.

son, I am crippled with pain, the cold prevents me from standing on my legs. shete ya no wãri kiwema, ya wahati no wãri uprawema.

to be crippled with pain. kiwema.

to become ardent, to start sweating. heyoshiprou.

the sun was declining when he arrived home. mothoka kaiprou tehe a koã kopema.

large (nauseating) mushrooms sprouted leaning. yore pe pata kaihou shoaoma (mit.

to incline, to decline (of celestial bodies). kaia.

to remain behind, to stay behind. hetaai.

1. (defective verb intransitive) to rise up, acquire a bad position (leaves of a roof). 2. state: raised leaves. posusu.

I'm going. ya koo.

let's hurry to leave. pemaki koo ta haio.

to go, to go back, to return, to come back. oprou.

to let meat become infested with fly larvae. mothepiamai.

it was because they had not desisted that they put themselves to groan one after the other. the pe tiraprai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiataroma.

they put themselves to groan one after the other. notiataroma.

to go live at a distance from others or from the communal dwelling. asiprou.

they live on the other side of the mountain. hehu a yapuru hami pe peria.

to roll over, to roll something cylindrical or round. yapuru.

he didn't hit his wife but, angered, he immediately put his bent arm under his head. pe suwepi a shei mai, e hesika repraoma.

he lay in a hammock decorated with transverse strips, and immediately put his bent arm under his head. thoo ke thoku tipruta ha a perikema, a hesika repraoma.

to quickly place the bent arm under the head while lying in a hammock. hesika reprakei.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to feel joy at someone else. pereshi.

to scratch oneself with an object. hikekeo.

botanical, tree (unidentified). terio hi.

I stayed awake for a long time. ya mamoku reitia.

I stayed awake for a long time. reitia.

to make several knots on the same object. moshokoreakei.

to build several temporary shelters or several camps (at different times) in the same place. fyãno yarikamai.

to hit someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikai.

there is a lot of tobacco, when I have finished harvesting the high leaves of the plants, I will go. pe nohi kuatarou ha yaironi, ya the pe wai hisihisipi ha hititiprarini, ya nohi mohotua totihirayou.

the otter disappeared in a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuprou.

to go and come back, to come and go. mohotuaprarou.

to sharpen two utensils by rubbing them together. namo yakekeai.

to sharpen two utensils by rubbing them together. yakekeai.

to make oscillate to make fall, to make a person fall by pushing them violently. atate.

you have had a slip of the tongue. wa aka tihekia re yaipe.

to habitually make mistakes while speaking. aka tihekiwe.

to make a mistake while speaking, to have a slip of the tongue. tiheki.

I will mix the bark of the mãrã sihi tree with the aphrodisiac kumi and use it (when I am very close to her). kumi ya rii fa feshiprarini, mãrã ya siﬁ fa feshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

balsam of tolu tree, Myroxylon balsamum (Fabaceae). mãrãpi.

I realized later that you had offered a hammock. amaka ke wa ki kãi ma re hipekenowe thai.

adorned with longitudinal stripes, like the hammocks of the "Whites", so are their backs. hei nape ke pe amakapi e pe pata oni sherorowe re kure naha, e naha keki yaipe oni kuwe.

hammock made of cloth. makapi.

to become darker in a place (durative). hutei.

dispárenle flechas, que se muera. yama a wãri si hetimarema ke, a wãri ta mataru.

to kill with a weapon, to kill by wounding (lit.: to split the skin). mataru.

following Woman-palm the songs are directed here. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

Woman-palm. hokosiyoma.

they will find refuge on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha the pe he ruoyorupe.

refuge. ruoyorupe.

to make noise while walking. shurushuru.

to break into small pieces (southern Orinoco dialect) and also it can be The word 'nikashi' in Yanomami means '(no clear translation)'. nikashi.

to break into small pieces. nikashi.

en el conuco hay muchos racimos de plátanos (colgando de las plantas). hikari theka hami kuratha a perikiwe.

colgados en gran número (como personas en chorros). fperiki.

you will put him face down at the entrance and search for his lice (lit. pei yoka ha noma wa e pe oai reope.

to search for lice, to pick lice. reope.

(he/she) speaks of the south of the Orinoco: we are already undertaking the last part of our journey. p emaki peishokuai waikia ke a kure.

to undertake the last part of a journey, not to be too far from the goal during a journey; to approach. peishokuai.

to be loose, slack. prayuku.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

they kept the banana shoots piled up on Mount Mãiyo. mãiyo ke ki ha kuratha sipe hirapomahe (mit.

he left his tobacco quid in the handle of the stone axe. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma (mit.

1. To experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. mãiyo.

to eat a little, for a short time. iyatou.

he was walking with his arms around the shoulders of the two women. suwe ke kipi ipihiaprarope hami a pakihiapraroma.

to walk with arms around each other. ipihiaprarope.

to give two objects. porakakei.

she (cries) lifting and lowering over her head objects that belonged to the deceased. matohi ki kãi yokoai.

to pull quickly towards oneself; to pull the cord of an outboard motor to start it. yomiprai.

to drag someone by the arm. karereaprarou.

to have pain, to suffer (due to a blow or wound). hamii.

to lie side by side, in the same direction, in a hammock. eshãmi.

the váquiros escaped immediately, being accompanied by Sherekanawe. ware ke ki tokua shoarayoma, sherekanawe a rurureherima.

1. To pile up, place objects on top of each other or inside each other; to hang two hammocks one above the other. 2. To offer someone two objects at once. 3. To exchange, barter (an object). 4. To be accompanied by someone during a journey.. ruruai.

the fish split the guaral. yurini matiriawe ãsittha uhetirema.

to break, to split. ãsittha.

he will stay with you. kahe ke iha a kuo heape.

to stay, to remain. heape.

1. Desplegar, es-. yãrãre.

there is honey (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

past tense marker indicating a distant past (more than a day ago). rei.

to become wrinkled, flabby or soft (locally). wãpret.

you, follow us. kahe a ta nohãiku.

to follow, to go after. koro-tou.

they are really pijiguaos of the light species. frasha auaurimi pe ma re kui.

in the past the Yanomami did not have cambur plants of the 'short' species. hapa yãnomãmi peni yahatotorimi pe thaponomi.

object that possesses such and such a quality, such and such an aspect. frasha.

I am going to see. morohesirimi.

to lure into a trap, to invite people to a party in order to kill them and/or take their women. nomohorimou.

soft, tender, flexible. ãhusi.

Titiri, who lives there, wants to kill me, kill me here, I don't say that. kihi titiri a wãri roani, ware niya hore yepiai mapei ha, eyeha ke ware yepirei pe kunomai.

they want to kill me. yepiai.

(it speaks of the south of the Orinoco river). he hihotho.

to be blunt (of an arrowhead). hihotho.

now, immediately. henaha.

the fish that swirl around in large quantities (= the fish that swim in large quantities in the river). hei ki re shurirorati.

to flutter, to be raised or agitated by the wind, to swirl around; to agitate in large quantities. shuririai.

to lead a person by holding their hand or arm (a child, a blind person). ipipou.

notice that it is (too) small. a ma re ihirupiwei.

it is (too) small. ihirupiwei.

his father has given it to him. pe hiini a hipekema.

when the adults were absent, Jaguar killed the children (to eat them). pe hiire the pe no kupramou tehe, irani ihiru re pe shei heama (mit.

Kaw's father (the person Kaw's mouth calls father) informed us. kaw.

father, male elder relative in direct line. hiimou.

I do not eat. ya iyaimi.

I will not kill fish. yuri ya pe sheimi.

not. imi.

the ripe plantain smelled good, he ate several pieces that he cut with his incisors and finished it. kuratha a ni kreteri ha a ha weheriararini, a mi watherema.

to eat rapidly in that manner. weheriweherimou.

the mother quickly uncovered the child's hair to look for lice. pe niini yipi ke the henaki hapreshetarema.

to uncover, reveal. hapreshe.

The ant bites me. Kokoku ẽ wãri.

ant. kokoku.

the rocky wall of Mount Yaapiwe is high. yaapiwe ki pata re tirerakiri ye.

Yaapiwe (proper noun). yaapiwe.

to be happy. nashinashirimi.

he will squat down below, he will spit out the pathogenic principle. fei kitato ke ki peﬁthe ha, fei faye a re perire.

to squat down below. pehi ho.

Gather the leaves, we will scatter them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, to spread out. patherikei.

fan the flames and also it can be The word 'popoho' in Yanomami means 'to bristle, to stand on end (hair, feathers)'. koa wake popoho.

when the little birds are hit (by an arrow), their feathers briefly bristle. kirithami pe thao tehe pe popohotou.

fan. popoho.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cocoa plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma (mit.

to take different directions (summit of a tree, end of a branch); to sink. rãkokoprou.

fruit. wãtemo.

I beg you to pile up the firewood here. e y eha koã ãsho ta hirapraahe she.

firewood. hirapraahe.

when it began to get a little light my older brother spoke. pe the mi wãi wãisipi ihehetou tehe ãiwe a wã hama.

when it began to get a little light. ihehetou.

kura constitute a major class of supernatural beings, often in contrast with human beings (and ã n omãmi or yãnowãmi) or with the yai the, another class of supernatural beings, almost always maleficent. kura constituyen una clase mayor de seres sobrenaturales, a menudo en contraposición con los seres humanos (y ã n omãmi o yãnowãmi) o con los yai the, otra clase de seres sobrenaturales, casi siempre maléﬁcos.

supernatural beings. kura.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (to see his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokemai.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have done anything to you, they would have limited themselves to shooting you with poisoned darts (with a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to launch malefic substances by blowing through a blowgun. prothomorayou.

to become round, spherical. komoreãi, inc.

to become round, spherical. komoreãi.

they cut chuzos from manaka palm stems very quickly. manaka si sherisheria re yaiapotayonowehei.

to do something very quickly. sherisheria.

I was stung by a twenty-four without realizing it. shihoni ware the tikai totihionoma.

without realizing. totihionoma.

the people of the red partridges in turn rubbed the colorant on with their fingers, and likewise painted the edges of their eyes and feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

to rub the skin with a finger or hand to apply a colorant. hãhihãi.

mother-in-law, go get water so I can drink. yape, miha mãu u ta yakea, ya u ta koa.

I go to get water. mãu ya u yakeai.

to go get water (using a container), to fetch water. yakerei.

some have already planted in the ground the posts that support the base of the roof. ai peni nahi pe hehã theiprawe waikiwe.

to have been planted in the ground. theiprawe.

a short time passed. yãhuyãhumai.

to pass a short time. yãhu.

¿dónde los pondremos a cocinar. weti ha ke pema pe hariape.

to cook a food in water, in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. haripei.

do not let the path become silent, since they claim goods (lit. yoku matha waiamai tikootihe, wamaki ma re nakouwei.

to become progressively silent. waiai.

come to look for us. wamare ta koreyo.

come to look for us. koreyo.

to make thin, to make not thick. hepisiprawe.

to become rough, coarse, grainy. ererãi.

then I tensed the string of my bow. hãto ya nahitha si potehea shoamakema.

to tense the string of a bow. potehea.

not to sleep during the night. fmamo he wakarai.

at dawn Rabipelado left the collective dwelling. nãro re a horeprarou he wakarai yaioma (mit.

to stay up until dawn, to do something until dawn. wakarar.

is it good like that. ihi taani.

is it good like that. ihi taani.

he let many striped catfish escape (lit. pruka araremi pe tokuhamama.

to flee repeatedly in different places (a hunted animal, a fish). ftokuhai.

pijiguao palms. pijiguaos.

I was tired of working and stopped. ya ha mohioni ya ohotamou mratariyoma.

to stop, to cease. mohioni.

aquí es donde apareció por primera vez. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

directional. -yoru-.

the final phase. aheprariyo.

he buried his nails in the top part of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei (mit.

the top part of the skull. ukuka.

the small stream of water becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to end abruptly, to have no exit (a path, a stream of water). horokai.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to carry something under the arm, to carry an object tucked between the skin and the loincloth; to keep an object pressed. hãkimapou.

it broke into several pieces when it fell to the ground. a hiki ha shetepani, thoku ha prakini, karahirima e kei tehe poko yehekiprariyoma.

it broke into several pieces. yehekiprariyoma.

when I kill a peccary, I carry it whole like that. kamiyeni ware ya pe pata ha niyaprani, ya pe pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

to carry a whole animal with its legs hanging down. tirororei.

they cut rapidly lances from manaka palm stems. manaka si sherisheria re yaiapotayonowehei.

they cut rapidly lances from manaka palm stems. yaiapotayonowehei.

stay calm, be quiet. mamikai pe ta kuiku.

slowly, silently, Centipede started crawling. opisi, mamikai, kumãrãroriwe a yonitou re perayoherima.

to stay calm, quiet, silent; to not create problems, threats or insults. mamikai.

to turn yellow (plant). frããi.

go to take them pijiguaos. rasha ke e pe ta perapaharu.

to take them (pijiguaos). perapaharu.

to let something become hardened like leather, to let something become deformed (through negligence). prihããi.

he got angry and left, abandoning the banana plants. a fa huoshuoni siki taa fa shoakeferini.

to abandon, to leave behind. shoakeferini.

eufemismo para anunciar la muerte de determinada mujer (lit. pukuye ãsi mashi rukea.

correa que sirve para llevar a los bebés. remashi.

the remains of hallucinogenic after a copious intake. nas.

to pass through the same place. hatahata.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. nohi peye.

who inclined (the container) of my kashuhuri seeds. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

seeds. uhuri.

to tell someone to go somewhere (upriver). fu.

Siroromi skinned the man who was screaming in vain from pain. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe (mit.

to scream in pain. miyomiyomo.

under the effect of anger. fhushuo pe wayu ha.

to provoke someone's anger. fhushuo ka thai.

anger, wrath. fhushuo.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to pile up, to gather together. poshoshou.

to be getting deloused. kekamorãyou.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakakei.

to lift an object by taking it from one side. hokeprai.

speech from upriver. fasipi.

to start kneading cassava flour so that it remains a little liquid inside. urereprai.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

to build a temporary shelter. kumou.

to widen progressively towards the edge the wall of an object while making it (canoe, vessel, basket, etc.). ehetekei.

my eyes became red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

my eyes became red. wakepema.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club on him. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to make something or someone fall by pushing them down an inclined plane. nihorãmãi.

however the tree is and also it can be The word 'tehe' in Yanomami means 'now, immediately'. ya tupei kuroi: sin embargo el árbol es.

tree. tehe.

bend the arm. poko ta tishakoiku.

to bend the arm, to hang a hammock between two posts (or two trees) too close to each other (the hammock then forms too pronounced an arc). tishakoai.

expression synonymous with 'those who rub themselves with dye' (referring to the chachalacas birds). hei ki re hirikope (o hei ki re hirikore).

expression synonymous with . hirikore.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe metamorphosed. riye wãtetetaruni, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei.

the hole closed immediately. wãtetetaruni.

"my domestic animal attacked the fierce beast there", he said. "thãriyeni yaro a waitheri re shurukuapiyei", e kuu yaioma.

attacked. shurukuapiyei.

the women will certainly see the mortar (when we crush the bones of those we have killed). suwe ke pe wãrini hii ke hi ka mii totihipehe.

Mortar. Mortero.

to become sticky or viscous. yãrekeãi.

to open a path by cutting vegetation with a cutting instrument (striking downwards or obliquely). fyo pahetimai.

to open a path by cutting vegetation. pahetimai.

after my departure (on the occasion of your death), the fragments of your calcined bones will be thrown out (from the mortar where they will be crushed). wamaki ishi pe wãri akatahu yutuhou heowe.

outboard motor part, spare part of a motor. fmotoro akatahu.

piece, fragment. heowe.

the sun was setting when he returned home. mothoka kaiprou tehe a koã kopema.

the sunlight no longer reaches except the tops of the trees. mothoka shi shererou.

the sun is low (sunset). mothoka yahatotowe.

the sun begins to decline slightly (around 1pm). mothoka yotehewe.

sun. mothoka.

to take out a gourd container to consume the ashes it contains. fhishima ithomai.

to consume the pulverized bones of a dead person. fhishima thai.

gourd container for storing the ashes of a shaman. amotha.

to stay for a moment in the center. thariprao.

the chickens eat the shells of their eggs. kakarani nathe si pe wao.

they eat the shells of their eggs. kakarani.

to remember (after having reviewed in memory), to find a solution to a difficulty. taeprou.

they conserve their plumes in the palm spathes that they slide under the roof. ihami paushi pe re titipouwehei.

they conserve their plumes. titipouwehei.

hoja enrollada en forma de cono. hoshokorema.

they snored. pe hohoruãmoma.

to snore. hohoruãmou.

the hekura chased them and they disappeared. hekura peni pe ha yashuprariheni pe mrarayoma.

disappear. mrarayoma.

they left in a hurry. pe shi hariwe re huokeiwei.

they left in a hurry. huokeiwei.

Are all the bamboo tips well painted. ekipini rahaka ãiãmo ke ki tahititiraruhawe.

all. ekipini.

to install one. pehithemokei.

eran susurros (they were whispers). mahanini the ã kuoma.

whisper, barely audible. mahanini.

grated cassava. nashi hki.

grated cassava. hki.

to have yellow urine (which is generally interpreted as a sign of illness or old age). niaasi koirapi.

to have a sickly yellow tint. koirapi.

to have grown (a plant). kaurayou.

to prefer, to choose, to aim preferentially at one thing instead of another. yaimai.

to hang a container tilted, to put a container off balance. kareamai.

to cut a finger. fimiki hãnio.

to cut oneself, to have cut oneself. hãni.

to split it, he split one of its ends to make the mouth, and the wood by striking it against the ground. yahekiai, inc.

to break, to split. yahekiai.

to transport on the back two dead animals tied together. erekepou.

to transport on the back two dead animals tied together. erekepou.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to disseminate, to space out (plants, animals). shororoai.

Cascade of Thunder. yãrutha a pora.

mythological tree that is found in the land inhabited by the ancestors in ancient times. yãrutha.

appear, oh father of mine. hapemi a ta petaru (lamento funerario).

I shot an arrow at him as soon as he appeared. a petou tehe ya the niya shoakema.

Siroromi appeared when the great bonfire was burning. wake pata wauwaumou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

to become visible, appear; appear suddenly, emerge; manifest, make oneself heard. taprou.

to extend, to widen, to amplify (a surface). rerahaakei.

to take a semi-pasty consistency. mi thepeheai.

to take a semi-pasty consistency. mi thepehe.

I'm going to look for shawarakurimi fruits. shawarakurimi ya ki toai.

edible fruit of the shawarakurimi tree, harvested often in large quantities during the rainy season. shawarakurimi.

these are fragile. éstas son frágiles.

fragile. frágiles.

to be crowded locally. hithokoã.

she was called Woman-honey and she was very beautiful. yãmonãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe heparohowe a wãri kuoma.

beautiful, splendid, magnificent. riyehe.

the one who habitually performs the action indicated by the verbal root (masculine form). -rewe.

The baby's navel is still attached. Amo yemota pe wake.

navel, belly button. yemota.

to become damaged, crushed (extremity of a long object). thekeheprou.

when I have departed, that fire will make them suffer (they will be incinerated in it when they die). ihi wake ha wama nini preai hoowe.

when, while. hoowe.

wild yams (plural). mamohiyomi ke ki.

wild yam (Dioscoreaceae), with dark gray pulp. mamohiyomi.

Siroromi desolló al hombre que chillaba en vano de dolor. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to scream in pain. wãyu.

to kill an animal by grabbing it by the hind legs and striking its head against a tree. mohe yoaai.

to strike or hit something with the head or face. yoa.

while the others were away, they stayed at home to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou ha heani.

to stay, remain, be present during someone. heani.

a jaguar went to reach the path that they had taken. k ama ke kipi mãyo ha ira ke a pata he ha haikuni.

to reach a path. haikuni.

to tap with the tip of an object, to knock on a door once. krookokei.

to name oneself. sipoo.

to fabricate small. wãisikiripiprai.

to mix or stir (a liquid) once. tikoreprai.

to become generous (while before one was not), to feel like giving (while before one did not feel like it). ihitaprou.

upriver speech. anafu.

upriver speech. anafu.

to lengthen several objects, to wait for something to become long. rapamai.

he prepared a tobacco wad and approached to offer it to Iewe. nahe ha yatakini iewe ke iha nahe hipeai ha ikuikuni.

tobacco. yatakini.

He was determined to go. Niyorãyou wake huu.

determined. niyorãyou.

he sharpened the end of his club a lot. himo ora ke a namo thai preyukua.

to sharpen to a point, make pointed (perfective). preyukukei.

they used to go to the forest to roast caterpillars over the fire. uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaati re ayaonowei.

they used to, they had the habit of. ayaonowei.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head, with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to put the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekekei.

she collected the tobacco without hurrying. pee re nahe re hoketaonoweri.

she collected (the tobacco) without hurrying. hoketaonoweri.

and in that region there are many sloths and also it can be The word 'ta' in Yanomami means 'will'. ihi the urihi ha ihama pruka a huu (mit. It is a Particle. ).

there. ta.

(he) moves his hand from right to left with spread fingers, to indicate that what is being looked for has not been found. imiki yãweyãwemou.

to move from right to left a raised hand with spread fingers, to indicate to someone that what they are looking for has not been found. yãweyãwemou.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something at a distance, to leave something in the forest before entering a dwelling. heweai.

to set on fire. incendiar.

él andaba sobre la punta de los pies. the hitesheapraroma.

he walked on tiptoe. hitesheapraroma.

trees dragged in successive form by the fall of another larger one, especially when their trunks have been previously carved to obtain this result. nomihou.

the fish pulls the fishing line or thread slightly several times (with little force). yuri a ikoikomou.

to pull slightly several times. iko-.

slightly. parokai.

Oso hormiguero caminaba con la cabeza hacia arriba (buscando algo que estaba sobre los árboles). teperiwe ke a hiyoka wãri nonoãpraroma.

alcé un momento la cabeza (para ver). ya mi re nonotariyowei.

to raise the head, look up. nonotou.

when felling an apia tree, I crushed the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

ocumo plant. ohinaye.

those who did not commit incest. the pe shi re katehei ke the pe.

1. Not to be tangled; not to be disoriented. 2. Not to commit incest. shi katehewe.

the dog, large and beautiful, lay (dead) on the ground. hiima ke a pata wãrishanawe yeepraa yaioma.

lay (dead). yeepraa.

the váquiros have straight and pointed ears. ware pe yimikaki hiyekewe.

a feline. uiro.

to turn yellow (plant). frã.

to authorize or send (someone) to do something. nape shimiãi.

to authorize or send (someone) to do something; to convince (someone). shimiãi.

the Yanomami paint themselves black when they go to war. pe wayu huu tehe yãnomãmi pe ishimou.

to paint oneself entirely black. ishimou.

to be slightly inclined. fkaihihi.

to have moved away (perfective durative). ayorarei.

the people of his community. kama theri.

he is a member of my community. kamiye theri ke a.

community, member of a local group. trontheri.

to open, to leave ajar. ãikiãmai.

said of a supernatural being that has thrown a magical substance at a person. fimiki no hori.

said of a supernatural being that has thrown a magical substance at a person. no hori.

bamboo (plural object, perfective aspect). hirororarei.

appear, oh father of mine. hapemi a ta petaru (lamento funerario).

I shot an arrow at him as soon as he appeared. a petou tehe ya the niya shoakema.

Siroromi appeared when the great bonfire was burning. wake pata wauwaumou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

to become visible, appear; appear suddenly, emerge; manifest, make oneself heard. taprou.

to dedicate oneself all the time to sorcery. riyaya.

the wind rose up and the branches fell. watori re a hokeprou re kutheiwei, hii ke hi poko prariroma.

to rise up, to get up. kutheiwei.

to increase (in number). thetheprou.

to live next to someone. tikepariyo.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. wereoprou.

you will not be able to break my head (with your teeth). yare he pehi rukemai mai ke the jar.

to go under; to pass under. pehitheaai.

that was what I wanted to do (said upon returning after killing an enemy) and also it can be The word 'thaprai' in Yanomami means 'to kill'. ya the pe niya thaprai ta kui.

kill. thaprai.

to be raised and curved (a normally flat object). yotatawe.

a seed that is a potent hallucinogenic substance. nen un grano que es una potente sustancia alutidad, este número.

seed. grano.

fact of few of its inhabitants (dwelling, camp: often in the morning, due to tasks in the conuco or in the forest). mathokopramai.

cut the umbilical cord of the baby and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

cut the umbilical cord of the baby and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. hãniprareiwei.

duerme en un chinchorro mugriento. yii ke ki tepepishi ha a perio.

to make dirty, to soil. tepepishiamai.

to work with a burin (thomi naki). tekeke.

ir de un fuego al otro (con frecuencia para evitar a un visitante y no ofrecerle nada). huaprarou.

to crumble, to collapse (perfective, plural object). hashishirarei.

he killed those who were beautiful (lit. the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiprai ha kuparuni.

to decide to kill a specific person. katitiprai.

I want to go there. ya no hurayopi.

I want to go there. hurayopi.

(related to pee nahe kare). pee nahe hopou.

to extinguish (a fire). ãkikiãm.

your legs are covered in veins. wa mãtha mãthoyãh i p i.

veins, having protruding veins (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). mãtha.

to redden locally by the action of the sun. heteteai.

to bend or curve the tip of an object. toyekekei.

to be in the last position (during a collective journey through the forest). shiokakei.

you know well that tomorrow I will leave you (to go somewhere else). henaha pe thapi heiai ma re kupiyei.

the pijiguao palms are in bloom (the speaker is in a place different from where they usually live). rasha a rarou kupiyei.

there is no one in the dwelling (located in another place). yano a proke kua kupiyei.

to be located in a different place than the place of the utterance. -piyei.

to have a protruding navel (insulting). yimotha poyoyowe.

navel, belly button. yimota.

to adjust badly, to put crookedly, to introduce badly, to close imperfectly; to not bury deep enough. hietimakei.

Õmawe squatted near Rahararitawe upon arriving, to initiate a ceremonial dialogue with him. omaweni rahararitawe a himomai kãi roaai shoapeheroma.

to sit or squat with a specific purpose; to spend time visiting friends (who live in the same house). roaai.

to keep someone awake, not let them sleep. hihirimapou.

faint sound of an engine in the distance. motoro ke ãmomiã.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma (mit.

faint noise, barely perceptible. ãsithaki.

it seems that they want to attack me at all costs and I am still waiting for them. ware niya hoã shurukai he yatiprouhe ha ya pe no ma re tapou shoai.

they want to attack me at all costs. yatiprouhe.

the ancestors committed many incests. weremou no motaai ha yaiikuni.

incests. motaai.

food that is scraped with the teeth. wãhehãmou.

food that is chewed. wãshikãmou.

when it started to rain, she went to collect leaves under which she took shelter. maa a kei tehe, yãã ke the henaki ha thakini, a he yohokema.

to take shelter, to take refuge. yohokema.

to divide a piece of meat or a wad of tobacco into many parts, to offer them. hakokai.

be quiet (stay calm). a ta shi hirotaru.

to be calm/tranquil. hirotaru.

external appearance of beings. sikrãpi siki.

piece of clothing, piece of cloth. iro siki.

sheath of the palm tree. sikro siki hãkãmi.

external covering, form, appearance. sikãpi.

he will get upset. kukei.

to initiate someone as a shaman. hekuraprai.

It is a verbal suffix indicating various grammatical functions such as future tense, perfective aspect, and modality.. -i.

I will mix the aphrodisiac kumi with the bark of the mãrã tree and use it to seduce her. kumi ya rii fa feshiprarini, mãrã ya siﬁ fa feshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

bark. siﬁ.

Anteater was walking with its snout raised upwards (looking for something in the trees). teperiwe ke a hiyoka wãri nonoãpraroma.

to raise the snout/nose upwards, to sniff upwards. nonoãpraroma.

hurry up in lighting the fire. wa wake ha yetarini.

hurry up in lighting the fire. yetarini.

Õmawe and Yoawe ate apia fruits. omawe sho, yoawe sho apia ke ki wapima.

to eat fruits. wapima.

to refer to an unknown woman (whose exact kinship is unknown). esposuwe.

to be in the last position (during a collective journey through the jungle). shiokaai.

they (two) made the tree swell/inflate. hii ke hi hurumapirema (mit.

they (two) made the tree swell/inflate. hurumapirema.

tonina, freshwater dolphin; Inia geoffrensis (Iniidae). torina.

the two claws of a crab. pei yorahepiki.

crab. yorahepiki.

después de una corta ausencia, él franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda trayendo una cesta llena de frutos momo. momo ke pe pata thari ha yehireni, the horetou re korayouwei.

he franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda. yehireni.

Dry creek. hashiCaño seco.

The woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now (myth). mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma (mit.

to dry up. hashitiai.

no metas nada más (en la cesta), está repleta. kui ha wa thaprai mai, pe the hishiki.

to be full, crammed. hishiki.

your son will be brave (lit. wa ihirupi wayuope.

to give birth with pain. fihirupi.

to those people there, they want to kill them (lit. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

to skin the crest and neck of a bird (paují). yoaheni.

to kill a man with a flat object during a raid. makeheprai.

to join a group of fighters, to come to someone. etepramai.

we are shooting arrows at him. pema a niyapraai.

we (I and they) are at war with them. yama pe niyapraai.

to shoot arrows at, to be at war with. niyapraai.

a young girl who was confined because she had her first period, left her enclosure unnoticed. utu chacha que estaba encerrada porque había tenido las primeras reglas, salió de su reducto sin ser notada.

a young girl who has had her first menstruation. chacha.

upriver speech. anafu.

upriver speech. anafu.

it is a bird of prey that killed the two, in your absence. koikoimini ke kipi nohi porakaprai hearayou kuhe.

two animals, two enemies. koikoimini.

of. de.

the ancestors metamorphosed and transformed into amahiri. no patapi pe shi ha wãrihoni, amahiri pe rii kuprariyoma.

metamorphosed, transformed. wãrihoni.

(the animal) was digging a hole by removing the earth with its paws. pei mamikini the ki kakekuka(ke) iha.

to dig a hole by removing the earth with the paws/feet (of an animal). kakekukakekumai.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

they do not utter death threats (against you). the pe ã hoyããi maa kure.

1. Speak frankly, not hide what one thinks. 2. Always utter death threats.. hoyãokei.

Cats have a rough tongue. mishi pe aka namo: los gatos tienen la lengua áspera.

rough, prickly, irritating. hotupi.

He quickly brought the leaves close, lit them on fire, and burned the bees. the henaki ha ahetetamarini, henaki wake piyemakema, pothothe , yopri puu naki hisikikema: aproximó las hojas sin perder un instante, les prendió fuego y quemó las 1.

to quickly bring something close. ahetetamai.

with this food; arrows. con esta comida; pema a wãri waiﬂechas. 2. 2. To accompany someone back. Acompañar de regreso a alguien [p e- shosho.

(food name). shosho.

the Yanomami mix malefic substances with the soil of footprints and are always pronouncing people's personal names. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi, wa the pe hore peyeprai si ihehea ha.

to mix a malefic substance (heri) with the soil of a collected footprint, to make the owner of the footprint sick and possibly die; to cast a magic substance towards someone. raraprai.

null. tainama.

do not attack us. y a m areki thaamatihe.

do not attack us. thaamatihe.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than; to place closer to a certain limit. haweheamai.

I go. hi naka.

to go, to walk. hii*.

who else did you go with. weti sho waheki huma.

who else. weti sho.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama (cha.

to open the mouth, to open the snout in a threatening manner (animal), to open the beak, to separate the jaws. shetetou.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

to pass. pasar.

to have healed from an illness. ãnikirayou.

I am happy. yoiyoi henaki.

to be happy. yoiyoi.

tree. Duguetia.

he appeared and went towards me. a petareyoruma.

Danta went to sit on a thick forked branch. hiki hãkãrãpi pata kuope ha shamariwe ke a pata tikepareheroma.

when he arrived at mid-height (of the tree), they made the trunk swell. peshekutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

directional morpheme. -vhv-.

to make concave (perfective aspect). hopokokei.

to become breathless, to become exhausted. wãshimiprou.

1. to separate (skin of a fruit, bark of a root or tree) 2. to skin, to flay (an animal). tiprokoai.

to join the hands. fimiki prouhutou.

to join the hands. prouhutou.

upon arriving they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter, spread out, disperse objects on the ground. yapikirei.

to repeat what was heard (often distorting it in a biased way). wãnomorayou.

to be hit by an arrow and fall from a hammock. waheprou.

at dawn they offered baskets of food, they offered baskets full of momo fruits. the pe ni ithãprayou ha henaponi, momo ke a ithãprai ha kuparuheni.

they offered baskets of food. ithãprayou.

the carrying strap stretched downwards. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downwards (terminative aspect). prayukuprou.

all of them have returned. pe koã haikirayoherima.

they have returned completely. haikirayoherima.

the visitors no longer come because they do not give anything in return for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

they have ambushed along the path (upriver). yo ka mamo noﬁ reparihe, a niya kuu yaro.

path, road, trail. fyoku.

qué pene tan grande era ése. wai ta preonowe.

qué gordo era ese pene. wai ta preonowe.

big, large. preonowe.

he tied the capuchin monkey tail around his head, and smoothed it with his hand. ha yohoreni, the teshina hokokama.

to cover one. yoho.

and. y.

to start swatting or slapping. paiprai.

to be partially reduced to powder or ashes; to be locally smoothed. kopehea.

to fabricate killing a man with a flat object during a raid. makeheprou.

to have someone paint one. shopohomou.

to put the arms. wikokãi.

you have an ugly head. wa he wãri towemi.

to be sick, to be in poor physical condition. towemi.

because I am a turtle eater. totori watimi ya kutaeni.

everyone knows that I am a jaguar killer. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

This suffix gives a graceful twist to statements, it is usually found especially in expressions of ceremonial dialogue.. RVtimi.

I don't understand the upriver speech very well. Mamisi proinama ama huu wake kuma the pree.

upriver speech. mamisi proinama.

we took another, shorter path. ai yo hami yamaki he tiherirayoherii.

we took a shortcut. tiherirayoherii.

the man had mixed with the dense group of winged termites, he had. mi ãmo totihi ha (mit.

the voice of the ancestor came out from the bottom of the burrow (saying): "come get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni: "ware ta koreyo. ". ".

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs. -paru.

the mashohara plant comes towards you, moving at ground level. mashohara henaki wayu re urerope ye.

a cultivated plant; Blechum sp. (Acantaceae). It is attributed hallucinogenic properties, inhaled mixed with yakoana.. mashohara.

she was going from one side to another and her laughter was always moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

stay still (or else, you'll see what happens). pe he ta reshipro (antífrasis).

to go from one side to another, not to stay still. reshiprope.

to cover one. oromashimou.

in all the points of the trees. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to rub against, to clean, to wipe, to erase by rubbing with the hand or a pointed object; to dirty or stain an object by rubbing or applying another. hãhiã.

fratafratawe. ãmoku*.

a fish bone is getting stuck in my throat. yuri ya niosi hããi.

a fish bone will get stuck in your throat. wa niosi hããrei.

to get a fish bone stuck in the throat. hããrei.

fruits. ãhuku.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. eyeha ke ware wãri yeﬁi, pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

nuca. yeﬁi.

supernatural plant whose stem is hollow and has transverse partitions like bamboo. tikene.

be a little long (arrow). hutehe.

to take/receive something that has been taken from someone. hukekei.

to cut a finger. fimiki hãnio.

to cut oneself, to have cut oneself. hãni.

the water of the flood did not go quickly, it approached slowly. motu ke u hainomi, opisi u owema.

to approach slowly. hainomi.

to have the shoulders, neck and lower jaw painted uniformly in ocher or black. rukekewe.

it is a package of fish. yuri ke e hãro.

she immediately made a package (in which she wrapped the food). hãrohãro a thai shoakema.

they (two) put the package of fish to roast on the embers. yuri ke ã hãro re yapipeiwei.

package, bundle. hãrohãro.

he made the great horoeti tree explode. horoeti hi pata homopramarema (mit.

(perfective form of -prama) used in the presence of derived forms, modals or others with the same phonological conditioning. -pramari.

stream of water that becomes turbid or muddy when a living being crosses it. ushishiãi.

to emerge suddenly. shirimo.

I waited for the paují to perch before shooting it with an arrow. paruri ya ha romakini ya niyaprarema.

to wait for a bird to perch (before shooting it with an arrow). romakini.

to drink. wakaroai.

1. to spread out, scatter. 2. To attract an object towards oneself that is out of reach of the hand, bringing it closer with the body or with a stick.. hãrãreãi.

lagoon that forms. thookoro.

1. to grow (human), 2. to make an arrow a little longer than usual, 3. to be a little long (arrow). tirehai.

Bot., planta. Este nombre designa a dos planlos de la misma familia, que crecen en suelos húmedos o a orillas de las corrientes de agua: Heliconia revoluta y Heliconia hirsuta, bijao (Heliconiaceae).. yatayata.

to become scarce. resheshãi.

if you participate often in a collective hunt you have to make them place you in the center of the group. pruka re wamaki rãmi re huuwei, mi ãmo ha re wa re romapareiwei.

to make someone be placed in the center. romapareiwei.

to move away, to distance oneself. kasiprou.

the souls danced one after the other. porepore pe praiai mi hetuoma.

we will come to you dancing (said by the hekura spirits to the initiate). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye.

to dance in succession, take turns dancing. praiai.

to constitute several groups of people or gathered objects. kokãprãwe.

the chain vine is concave (actually it is sinuous). rasirasi thotho a mi hopokowe.

1. to become concave (wall); to form a concavity (surface) 2. to make a wall concave; to hollow out the fruit of a cucurbit to make a container or gourd. hopokoai.

to become light red. momihiprou.

¿qué es lo que se quemó allá, en el lugar donde el suelo está cubierto (de hojas). kihi weti ke the rii yaoma the he re yohopiyei.

covered, burned. yaoma.

to have an end that bends sharply (usually said of a cambur plant that arches under the weight of the cluster it bears). pehuwe.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

covered with moss or foam. urashipi.

to be angry. mapari.

when the fire blazed, he put logs on top. koa wake parai tehe ãshoku makekea re mahireiwei.

he put logs on top. mahireiwei.

he transported the big rock again on his shoulder. maa ke ma pata yarukepou kooma.

1. Put on the shoulder. 2. Press, squeeze. yaruke.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it. tikukupei.

over there the váquiros (a type of bird) gather in large numbers. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

to move in large numbers, one after the other. manikou.

to make spin. hiyãhiãi.

to step on, to leave a footprint. kãshikãi.

cacao bean. anamo.

tubular opening of certain wasp nests. raparaparimi.

to protect oneself by placing branches or palm leaves around the shelter one inhabits. hikoromou.

to protect, to surround with a defensive fence. koro.

to salt. sayuprai.

the stream ends in a dead end. u he horokoa.

to not lead any further, to end in a dead end (a path, a stream). horokoa.

to begin to paint round spots on someone or something by applying a ball of coloring moistened with saliva. hikikiprai.

not being very big (speaking of game or prey). ãyãhãwemi.

sticky, gummy. karimari.

the roa tree had a very comfortable protuberance (to hold on to). roa ke hi ereheã topraa totihipariyoma.

to have a protuberance, a lump, a swelling. ereheã.

Duguetia cauliflora and Duguetia megalophylla (Annonaceae). Anusa.

no large pot is in sight, no large pot is hanging in the house (= we don't have any). hapoka pata a ma re taprou mai, hapoka pata pe ma re rukeprou mapei.

to be hanging, to be suspended. rukeprou.

to give false news. nomohori.

to receive a narrow strip cut or broken off. makosipei.

light black. ishi puhi ehepi.

light red. puhi.

while the members of my community stay to kill the enemy effigy, I go ahead walking in company of the others. kamiye yamakini iha no owe a shei hoohe nareo tehe ya paria narerayoherima.

I go ahead walking in company of others. narerayoherima.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to be better, to recover (health). manaheprou.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

they would have really liked to tell him to do it. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

to insist on someone to do something, to authorize someone to do something. shimiki.

he grabbed the fire, but did not manage to rise (= but did not manage to get up). wake teai ma kui a isipronomi (mit.

not to rise, not to grow, not to sprout. isiproimi.

to incline the head to receive a blow from an adversary. mi teio.

to lower, to incline the head. teiai.

it is your arrow. sherekahe ke a.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

stay sleeping while they make love with your wife. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo (mit.

your (singular). nomahe.

look, when the sun is at that point, I will come back here again. mamo ta shatiiku, eyeha the kutou tehe ya hayua kopariyo.

to repeat, to reproduce an event or action. shatiiku.

a stream whose depth level has dropped a lot during the dry season. u wiririprou.

whose flow gradually diminishes as a consequence of drought. wiririprou.

to be angry. moyenarimi.

homes. hogares.

he arrived after his departure, he has a light complexion. a wãri haa hepei ma re kuroi, a prushishiwe ke a thai.

to have a light complexion. prushishiwe.

to reserve a discovered product in the forest (by marking the place and telling others not to touch it). pomipou.

to make suffer, to make unhappy, to deprive someone of dignity; to give little, to disappoint someone. waikei.

a red and polished stone axe was leaning (against a tree trunk), downstream. poo ke the koshi pata wake si tãihiwe ithãã hã reikukirini.

was leaning (against a tree trunk), downstream. reikukirini.

to be beautiful, to grow well (all plants). tiririwe.

having accelerated breathing. hereherewe.

I feel like vomiting when I drink old water (lit. hote u peni ya kamishi yoruhou tharei.

(in all the places where we have lived) old tapir skulls remain on the ground (= they are the beasts that you have eaten thanks to me). shama pe hesi pata hote yapikiwe ma re kui.

old, used, deteriorated. hote.

you (pl. wama pe shepe.

we will kill the otter. proro ke pema a wãri shepe.

to kill. shepe.

give him tobacco. pee nahe ta hipeki.

tobacco. pee nahe.

one of them suddenly saw him and then all fixed their gaze on him. ai the mamo re keprakeiwei, the pe mamo pruka re shatiprakeiwei.

to fix one. shatiprakeiwei.

that hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

to harm someone. hamimarei.

the Yawari possess hollow tubes, similar to a blowgun, with which they blow magical substances (in their home located under the water). yawari ke peni rihu pe u nohi thapou kuporahei.

they blow (magical substances) there. kuporahei.

the hole in his earlobe is small. pe the yimikaki ka wahakewemi.

he was really tiny, but his penis was gigantic. pei ke the wai wahakemi ma yaii, pei ke the mo pata kua ha yairaruni (mit.

small, tiny; to be few. wahakemi.

to be wrinkled or creased locally. wãhi.

to refer to an unknown woman (whose exact kinship is unknown). suwepimou.

to become crispy or crunchy when it shouldn. hoteti.

they started to groan one after another. pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

they offer me fish one after another. yuri pe ha ware a topei notiatarouhe.

to do something one after another, to do something in succession. notiatarou.

I will wake up. ya rãpe.

wake up. rãpe.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or a magic substance). hehetai.

to crush, to squash. pathethe.

to extend. rerekeai.

some reach the other shore quickly (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

to reach the high part of a riverbank (the water of a flood), to approach the shore, to navigate a canoe close to the riverbank. ihetetekei.

the child is moaning. ihiru a re ãkãmiãmou.

to moan, to whimper. ãkãmiãmou.

for fun, to tap a termite nest with the hand so that they fall on someone's head and bite them. fhe yoothopei.

to give little taps with the fingers on an object to remove dirt or insects. yoothorei.

1. Yam with violet flesh. 2. Name sometimes given to the purple cambur.. yãpihirimi.

to make a drink or food spicy. nakeprai.

to make something collapse or crumble in a place. hishishiakei.

to be thinner due to. repisi.

to erode, to crumble gradually by action. wãshikiãi.

to burn a magical substance near an enemy. yayou.

to put oneself in a hip position. kaihikei.

Prereimariwe looked suddenly. prereimariwe ke a mamo shatipraa shoakema.

they really pursued him. a nape prakea ha yairoheni.

they painted their bodies and danced. pe yãmoã ha totihironi, pe praiama.

verb modifier (with adverbial function). RV2.

the white arrows of the chupacacao bird. herãmi pe sherekapi au.

white, clean. herãmi.

to be performing maneuvers to approach the shore (from a canoe). katimou.

to sharpen a bamboo point. hiroro.

to place oneself in the center when one was not there before, to place oneself for a moment in the center, to place oneself for a moment in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. tharitapei.

to become locally wrinkled, shriveled or soft (perfective aspect of the inchoative). wãpreterariyo.

to place. wari-.

esa guatura realmente no es la de un ser humano. yãnoãmi the wiipi mai ke the.

guatura (mythical monster). wiipi.

to lie down or be lying down in the direction of the length of the hammock (with the body parallel to the edges). karereo.

how abundant the tapir tracks could be. are pe mãyo heherama.

to exaggerate, to boast (of valor, warlike or sexual exploits, hunting ability); to tell, in an admiring tone, how abundant the hunt or fruits of the forest were, how big an animal was, etc.. heherai.

brother-in-law, when they are in bloom, come down from the mountain and come to eat. shoriwe ke ki rarou yaio tehe, shoriwe ke ki pe mi ta wereparu.

flowered. rarorayou.

to be angry. toreshesheãmi.

to visit, to enter a dwelling (to visit it). yãno kapamai.

they will not tell my son-in-law to do it, that another pulverize the calcined bones of the dead. ke wama a noﬁ yaipou mrai, shomi ke wamaki wãri ma kuini si ira ta kopeprarihe.

son-in-law. siyofraye.

to be a little long, a little loose. preyukuhu.

to bruise an object in several places. wãokopramai.

it is sour. the nashiwe.

upstream. nashiwe.

when felling an apia tree, I crushed the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

to crush by hitting with a stick, to perform a task by hitting with a stick (e.g. washing a hammock by beating it to remove dirt, hitting a plant to extract fibers). yatikiai.

(example sentence). ai nomawe ke the pe kasheshewe opi pokeai tehe, pe hayuyou.

to float, to appear briefly on the surface of the water. poke.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much, intensifier. eparoho.

do your parents really live near here. haahe pe hiraa ahetea yairani.

your mother. haahe.

tell them to be quiet, some of them insist on saying they will go to war. a wã no wasio ta poo, ai pe the pe ã he prakehou tharei.

to insist on repeating what one said, not to change one. prakeherayou.

brother-in-law, observe the water to see if it is turbid. ãsi, u ushishi kua ta mi.

to become turbid, to stop being clear (a liquid). ushishiai.

the clothes got wet from the rain. iro siki patherayoma.

to be wet from the rain. pathei.

to be always criticizing or scolding. wã pakehou.

to speak from upriver. pakehe.

what should be loved. nohimamou.

to find one's way again (after having lost it), to find the right direction again. fyo shi kateheprou.

that which can be untangled. katehamou.

I don't believe at all that you will stop wanting to eat meat, that's why I object. wamaki naiki mraaV.

to persist in refusal. wãrekoshãmi.

something similar to the phosphorescence of fireflies has just come off. hawe amakuri ke ki wake re hetirihe (cha.

to come off, to detach, to cease. hetirihe.

hand. imiki.

to lift repeatedly. yepiyepimai.

the revenge is fulfilled, they have split in two the arrowhead. enaha re ãhi rii kuwe, ãhi rii akatahuprai waikirayou kuhahei.

to split or divide in two. ker.

to take, give or receive two objects at once. yãhu.

I will not hit you. objemai ke the.

to hit, to strike. objemai.

your blood will gush out. iyeiye re ke ki pata ﬁreﬁremou totihia ha.

to bleed profusely. ﬁreﬁremou.

Invite someone to come live nearby. aheterei.

will someone from the neighborhood have killed my relative. kini ipa thora a teai pea ma ta kurahewe.

thick, slightly pasty; somewhat soft (the earth); malleable. yãhihiwe.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

to wonder. marani.

I crushed the wasp between my fingers. kopina ya na hutikiprarema.

I crushed it between my fingers. hutikiprarema.

to die. kete.

leaves that are used to make the roof of a dwelling and, being found in distant places, require camping in the forest during their gathering. fyãã hena henitiwe.

leaves used to make the roof of a dwelling. fyãã.

the. las.

they splashed each other and ducked their heads under water. the ki hamishayou ha the ki mohe kaoayoma.

they stayed home to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou heama.

reciprocal marker for transitive verbs; its perfective form. yorayou.

in front of the closed exit of the dwelling act as if brave: we will pierce their bodies with arrows. hei naha yoka pata weeo kuope ha pe mi ta nonopraru, pemaki pehi kãi wãri wahepramai totihirayou.

to act as if brave. nonopraru.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much. paroho.

to warn someone who killed a person and performs the unokaimou ritual that, if they are not careful, they will scratch themselves with their nails instead of with a sharp stick as required by the ritual (risking getting sores all over their body). tikokopramou.

I don. pramari.

to make or prepare a small quantity. wãisikiripiamai.

She quickly passed the tobacco over the glowing embers, formed the quid by pressing it in the palm of her hand, and threw it (to deliver it). pee nahe yetu re the Bot.

to pass over the fire. shãishãikei.

he/she smiles. kasi wateai.

to smile. watea-.

they must stop carrying gossip. wãri wãno the pe wãri rukematihe, ya kuaprarou totihio ke a tharei.

to stop carrying gossip. rukematihe.

to make an object rotate 180 degrees; to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemikei.

to make tobacco pungent by preparing it properly. nakiprai.

to remove wood shavings locally by striking obliquely with a cutting instrument, to work a wooden surface in that way. pakekeai.

there is a lot of tobacco, when I have finished harvesting the high leaves of the plants, I will go away. pee ke nahe pe nohi kuatarou ha yaironi, ya the pe wai hisihisipi ha hititiprarini, ya nohi mohotua totihirayou.

the otter disappeared into a little hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuprou.

to disappear, to be forgotten, to go away, to get lost. nohi mohotu-.

It turns into the shoroshoro ãhi tree (Cecropiaceae). Pl.

to turn into. shoripiai.

to be hungry. hãhãmiyoma.

he said in turn: "I broke my nose. e kuu mi hetuoma (mit. ". ).

on the other side Tilingo multibandeado enlarged the cavity of the rock in turn. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma (mit.

to do in turn, to do one after the other. hetuoma.

you will call us cowards unjustly. kamiye wamare he hore yathepe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to treat someone as a coward. yathei.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri.

the fire crackles. frãrãrãrãkiri.

to be angry. hiraka.

the trails they had left evoked misfortune (they all died by falling into a ravine). pe re kuaaiwei hami pe mãyo no wãi shi hiroprawe.

places where people were before dying. hiroprawe.

to make grow, to cultivate; to let grow. patamai.

to feel good. puhi totihitaai.

to feel good, to improve, to fix, to repair, to order, to classify. totihitaai.

object whose edge has been folded several times over itself. koheprawe.

give me a bamboo tip, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to receive from someone an object that they have obtained from another. torepei.

(speaks of the south of the Orinoco). kahu upe.

my daughter, who are you in love with. oãsi weti sho waheki nohimayou.

to be in a relationship of friendship with someone, to love someone. imãyou.

no existían ríos. hei parau pe re kui u pe kuonomi.

river. parau.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). warororayou.

to feel the effects of a hallucinogen, illness or any substance. wayu teai.

a larva is eating my tooth (lit. ouni yare naki wai.

larva of a beetle; Rhynchophorus palmarum (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). ouni.

he will squat down below, he will spit out the pathogenic principle. fei kitato ke ki peﬁthe ha, fei faye a re perire.

to spit out. peﬁthe.

I drink water. mau ya u koai.

The beehive is really splendid, let's drink the honey (mixed with water). puu ke a topraa yaia, pema u ta koa.

If only I could drink fresh water. si ahi ya the u wãri ha koarini.

to drink, to ingest a liquid food. koamou.

to be near. pesheku.

a lechosa totally chopped into pieces. shamakoro hakaroma no.

to visit during a journey several communities located in the same region. yare tiraatarai vb.

resultative suffix. hete.

the butterfly flew. potopoto natha hi.

butterfly. potopoto.

to be near. pesheku.

she had put thoru flowers in her earlobes, and looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

put a cotinga skin in my earlobe (= give me a cotinga skin). heimi siki ta huupari.

to carry something in the earlobe. huurei.

la gente de río arriba usa guayucos tan estrechos que los testículos les sobresalen por ambos lados. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

estar ubicado a ambos lados de. akaroprawe.

to sleep, to live in a hammock hung close to the ground. yahatotoo.

to keep one's eyes closed. misi yahokei.

to keep one. yahokei.

they must stop carrying gossip. wãri wãno the pe wãri rukematihe, ya kuaprarou totihio ke a tharei.

to stop carrying gossip. rukematihe.

(habla de río arriba.). shipeke.

to hit, to strike; to collide; to percuss. ftihirutihirutai.

they all surrounded and beat him. komi e pe he hã hãyopraruni, a sheremahe.

when we had finished surrounding them, the enemy warriors did not respond. wayu pe ã hai mi hetuonomi, yãnomãmi re the pe he hãyoprou tehe.

to surround, encircle, besiege. hãyo.

malaria. fura.

the Yanomami occupy an extensive region. yãnomãmi the ki perihiwe prari.

the skin of the serpent karahiri is wide. karahiri siki pata re praukupe ye.

to be vast, extensive; to be wide. prari.

That man. Peripo ama.

man. peripo.

the hallucinogenic ayukuma gives hunger or the will to work. ayukuma peni the pe ohetrabajar, estar ocupado.

to work, to be occupied. hikã.

Yãmonãmãriwe was beautiful, was large and of dark complexion. u ushishiãushuhuwe yarehewe totihitawe no kirii.

dark, muddy (water). yãm.

to lean slightly. yotehe.

to remain lying across for a long time. priritao.

Catch the oshe aka termites and offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe.

to capture termite soldiers. tithe*o.

to be in a hurry. tamaparu.

I twist cotton. shinari ya uku mohe poprai.

to roll, twist. poai.

to ask for help, to request a companion. thãrimamou.

plant. krããma.

in this direction are my conuco and my house. kiha ke ya hikaripi praa kupiyeheri, ya shaponopi praa kure.

are. kupiyeheri.

it seems that those who went on reconnaissance have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

to discover, to notice something in the forest. pomikei.

little one, open your mouth. shei, kahiki ta rereparu.

term of address for a younger son or brother (of either sex). shei.

his spouse was transformed into stone, with his arrows placed against him modifying (qualifying) it. pe heãropi pei ke ma kuprou waikirayouwei modiha, shereka ke ki ha waririmareni.

to modify, to qualify. modiha.

to wait until it gets a little daylight (to do something). uhehetamai.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoik u.

to embrace, to hug. waporoo.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

he arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to follow behind, to walk behind. nohãmi.

he hung the ripe plantains. kuratha ke ki wake re yaumakeiwei.

to hang, to suspend. yauamai.

fur of an animal. kirishãripi.

the pulp of those cambures is too hard. hei tate pe re kui pe shãhe amatopi.

to harden, to become abnormally compact (the pulp of a fruit). amatopiai.

face. mamoku.

terminative of . hoteprou.

let the children stay here wallowing in the mud. ihiru ke the pe wai sheyeo heai.

1. To throw oneself to the ground, wallow in mud or sand; to launch at full speed. 2. To sow by throwing grains; to throw an object to someone to give it to them; to violently throw an object to break it.. sheye.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then pressed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to crush by rubbing with the fingers; to crumble in the hand, to crush leaves when abandoning a path, for good luck during a search. hurukukei.

to divide into several parts. koperarei.

I go. mi hinowe.

go. hinowe.

to go down (of a water level). tererou.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their tools, their tools did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slip without penetrating (the blade of a tool in poor condition). pãhehãi.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or due to a heavy load being carried). fhuu mi thorukuwe.

to bend, to curve, to fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. thorukai.

she did not cease laughing because her entrails were causing her tickles. a ikãpraroma, a hushomi ha shikioni.

she did not cease laughing. ikãpraroma.

Rabipelado was crushed under the boulder and the macaw people rolled over his shattered remains on the ground to paint themselves. nãroriwe pei ke makini a nahihoma, a nahihiwe yapikope hami arari pe tihirumoma.

crushed, shattered, crumbled, crumbled. nahihiwe.

we will gather the leaves, each one on their side, we will spread them out again (to make our tracks disappear). hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope.

he piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

to be gathered in several groups. yototoprawe.

he protected the tobacco by putting stakes all around it. pee ya nahe hikorokema.

to surround with stakes driven into the ground. hikorãi.

embrace the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoik u.

to embrace, to hug. waporoik.

fabricate an oblong object. torohekei.

call your mother and let's hurry back home. naahe ke a ta naka, pemaki koo ta haio.

mother, maternal aunt, etc.. nii.

to clean a gun barrel or tube in that manner. mi ka tiprokoai.

to clean a gun barrel or tube by moving a long stick back and forth. tiprokai.

they (the hekura) could not lift the great rock easily, and it oscillated (in their hands). pei maki hereheprai ha maparuheni, pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma (cha.

to lighten, to lift easily. hereherei.

that Shamathari became a great shaman (= he has many hekura in his chest). ihi a shamathari re kuini pe pariki thãrimipariyo (cha.

to become a powerful shaman. thãrimipariyo.

quivers made from the thora bamboo. wana.

(plural subject). huprou.

her pregnancy was very visible, her husband was going to be stunned when he arrived. suwe ke e maka tiyeria ha, pe heãropi ke e ãmoku keprohorope.

to be in an advanced state of pregnancy (humorous). fmaka.

a locative or directional form. ku-imi.

he ran crying and arrived at his house. miã kãi rerea ha yairiherini, kama pe yahipi hami a koprariyoma.

arrived. yairiherini.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to keep in place by placing a heavier object on top of a lighter one. pateterei.

The water is becoming foamy. Yãã henaki mosipeki ponerse espumoso.

to become foamy, to produce foam. moshiai.

supernatural beings, considered responsible for certain diseases. rããri.

I launch the magical substance at them. ya pe he horou.

to launch a magical or malefic substance by placing it in the hand and blowing it; also said of the Spider-monkey Spirit when it projects its hairs to cause itching. horomai.

their hands were tiny. pe imiki remanio.

tiny, minuscule. remami.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

to be content. contentarse.

come to pour it here. eyeha the ta ripraayohe.

to give by pouring to several people. riakei.

the earth is crumbling. mashitha a hishiai.

it was no use putting stones (to plug the holes), the water undermined the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama (mit.

to collapse, to crumble (terminative aspect). hishiprou.

vamos (tú y yo) a preparar la mascada de tabaco en el fuego que está allá. kihi ke yãno ha pehe the ta yaaharu.

over there (at a visible distance from both speaker and listener). yaaharu.

to trace sinuous lines on one. hukekeo.

dialogues. diálogos.

to have hidden or concealed behind something (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). shãhorayou.

to have let oneself be scratched. hukekamorayou.

they live there, quite beyond the country inhabited by the Waika. peritayoa.

I just stole banana plants. ru thomiã re ayarekirihe.

banana plants. thomiã.

(related word). ami.

the nutria had curled up in the bottom of a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã waikirayoherima.

to be curled up in a compact mass; to coil up along. ikinirayou.

near, close to. shama-.

my ear unblocked. ya yimikaki homoprariyoma.

the palm sheath opened (releasing the flowers). rasha ãthe homoprariyoma.

1. To unblock, open up (e.g. an ear); 2. To appear from behind clouds (the sun); 3. To split or tear lengthwise (e.g. a plant sheath); 4. To germinate, sprout. homoprariyoma.

to intentionally break a long and rigid object by stepping on it. kahekimakei.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was shaking where the others were passing. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

move, shake at the base by a living being that is moving. ushu.

to mash and knead cambures with a forked stick. tiprokoprai.

to mash and knead cambures (a type of fruit) with a long stick with a forked end, agitating it up and down. tiprokoprai.

to have the natural form of a St. Andrew. pakirawe.

to have cooked in water, cooked in water (perfective). hariarei.

to scrape with the teeth the pulp of a fruit (to eat it). ãheheãi.

she realized that she only had coal in her hand. oshohore wa ki mãopou ta no hoopereshini.

she realized. hoopereshini.

they go to camp in the forest to eat morã fruits. morã ma nape shurukouhe.

they go to camp in the forest to eat fruits. shurukouhe.

the noise the little one was making could be heard: he was really nursing. ihiru ke a wai kruikru imou yaioma.

to produce a noise each time a sip of liquid is swallowed; the sound a baby makes when nursing. kruikru.

to damage, to lose. wãri maﬁ.

to damage, to lose. maﬁ.

to put something in the middle, in the center. thari.

to damage in several parts the edge of a tool by hitting it against a hard object. namo ka yakekeai.

to damage. tra.

to have the natural form of a St. Andrew. pakirawe.

who inclined (the container) of my kashuhuri seeds. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

I waited for the paují bird to land (before shooting an arrow at it). paruri ya romakema.

to incline or place something in a certain position. kashuhuri.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. no yu.

(habla de río arriba. maana hi.

(speaks of upriver). maana.

a great yellow flame runs on the ground. pitha a wake pata frãre re rererihe ye.

to run, to move quickly. rererihe.

as I detest them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

to cook pijiguaos (a type of fruit) for someone. harinomi.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to that by which they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a beast that was pursuing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to exceed (in quantity, in length), to go beyond (a limit), to leave behind. toreai.

roof. techo.

ancestor, hekura associated with yoni (a type of woodpecker bird). Yopararithawe.

to give two objects. porakakei.

I met them (in the sky, in the land of souls). ya kuo nareopeherayou kuhe.

drink it. a ta koari.

Cachicamo ate all the honey and left. moro upe waa ha hititirini a harayoma.

I told them not to sleep. "pe miotihe", ya kutariyoma.

verbal suffix indicating perfective aspect or location. -rayo-.

without knowing (that the dog had been killed) they laughed a lot as they went along. pe mohoti ha pruka pe ikãpraroimama.

to be unaware, uninformed, or indifferent. ikãpraroimama.

come quickly to tie it. eyeha a wãri okãprari ta hairoyo.

while the young men tie leaves (to represent the effigy of an enemy), go and stand (lit. huya peni henaki okãihe tehe, mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripaharuhe.

to tie, to bind. okããkei.

the hummingbirds pierced the top of the ancestors' skulls and sucked out their brains. poreri ke the he mono ha, teshori peni he tiwehepema, he yoshi pe ukukai shoaoma.

he pricked the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

to reach someone in the eye or head while doing something. tiwehepei.

he obstructed the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

I block the entrance of the agouti's den. opo ya ka he kahuai.

to close, to obstruct, to block an opening. kahukei.

it is located behind me (to help me fight the demon that is in the sick person). we a re ithope ye (cha.

to be located behind the dwelling (temporary shelters). ithope.

he had placed the blowgun vertically on a rock and kept it hidden on the Mountain-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. rihu ke a ha tikemakini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma.

I got into a canoe with some non-indigenous people and it was on that occasion. nape ihami ya ha tikeaimani iwariwe ya ma hapa tararema.

to place a long object vertically on top of another, or in extension of the other; to sit on top of; to seat a child on a load in a carrying basket to transport them in that way; to tell someone to position themselves in a canoe. tikemakei.

she hung the package from her father's hammock rope. pe f ii ke peki thapi ha a fãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

package. fãro.

the people of the cunaguaros are accustomed to crouch at the foot of the ãtãri bushes. ãtãri ke hipe koro hami yaori pe yererou re hearakiri ye.

to crouch, to squat against the ground. fyerere.

he is afraid to speak to you. kahe ke iha a kahiki kuyeoma.

to have one. kuyeoma.

to make viscous, to make sticky. yoripimarei.

he entered the collective dwelling unarmed, having lost his arrows and also it can be The word 'shapono' in Yanomami means 'house'. shapono hami a harayoma, mãroko, shereka ke ki a ha hoyarini.

unarmed. shapono.

to produce whirlpools in the water with one. kapoyo.

to have weeded. kaumorayou.

only some were able to quickly come out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to have come out of the water or a canoe, to be doing it. washirikei.

I was convinced that a snake was going to bite me and I walked with apprehension. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to feel inquietude, apprehension; to be jealous. haruai.

as Amoãyoma wants to go under it, the leaves of the singing tree embellish it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro.

to get under, to go underneath. pehithou.

to hide something (durative, plural object). hithemai.

to probe a makeukeu (a type of animal burrow in the southern Orinoco region); to spin rapidly between the hands. krohokrohomou.

to deform, become hard like leather, twist. ithotho.

I'm better now, my health continues improving little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to finish improving after an illness; to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). hereheprou.

he painted his face negligently. the mi hore wãri yãtãkema.

to paint oneself negligently or hastily. yãtãkema.

perhaps that is what they said (I did not hear). e naha the kuu hãthoã.

said without being heard. hãthoã.

we retake firm ground, we immediately set off on our way, and our line stretches out. yamaki ha hashiriikuni, yamaki re hirihiã re shoarayouwei.

we retake firm ground, we immediately set off on our way, and our line stretches out. hashiriikuni.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksand attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

sand, sandy beach. mrakamraka.

to introduce badly, to close imperfectly, to not bury deep enough. hietitaai.

(related form). hopoko.

it was useless for the son to despair, they threw his mother into the water. pe ihirupi ke e puhi uhutuai ma perani, pe nii e kea shoamaparemahe.

despair; to feel deep sadness. perani.

insult each other, you want to argue and say things frankly. ke kipi ta yahatuayou, pe no wã niya thatai wawetoo shoao kuprei.

to insult someone, to offend them by publicly proclaiming their physical imperfections (real or presumed). yahatuayou.

to paint a cross-shaped motif on multiple objects. yãhiriãkei.

to be dyed locally (in the indicated way), to have been grated, scraped, locally. hirikia.

to have a concave mark. wãhihiã.

I told him: "above all, do not touch the magic plants (those that make sick or kill)". yaithakarawe wa the pe hurii mai.

magic plant. thakarawe.

to have completely crushed multiple objects by biting with the incisors. washishirarei.

he is always making love. shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. opraroimi.

1. Classifier noun used to form words referring to wood added to hallucinogens. 2. Can refer to hisiomi or yakoana, an arrow in a ceremonial dialogue.. akehe.

what is coated with a black resin (the inside of a gourd). no ushimamou.

what is habitually coated with a black resin (the inside of a gourd). ushimamou.

he buried his nails in the top of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

Hoo had eaten the brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

top of the skull. heyoshipe.

it is not far away. the poushokuwe.

to be near. poushokuwe.

to be fat, big (living being). hutehou.

to steal (habitually). thomimou.

to reach a summit or ridge. matotokei.

los dos niños regresaron a la casa para buscar tizones. ihiru ke kipi koã kopeheriiwei, koa wake niya ha tepiani.

tizones (glowing embers). tepiani.

to become less and less visible in the darkness. waroshou.

attention, their voices sink/disappear under the ground. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

attention, their voices sink/disappear under the ground. tikooheri.

(he/she) goes upriver. shiporima thotho.

upriver. shiporima.

ni siquiera tengo ocumo para cocinar. ohina ya moku tuai ma marani.

las plantas de ocumo quedaron aplastadas con la caída de un árbol apia (en el conuco). apia ke hini ohina ke a sheparei kuhe.

ocumo. ohina.

(morpheme). -mo-.

larva of a beetle; Rhynchophorus palmarum (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). It is a thick, edible worm found in the rotting stem of coroba and moriche palms. Sometimes the palms are cut down to later collect the larvae. When one has a cavity, it is said: ouni yare naki wai (lit.: a worm or u of the palm is eating my tooth).. potimari.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually. yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

to fall asleep gradually. mikeheriiwei.

1. Scream imitating the howler monkeys, to provoke their response and locate them (during a hunt). 2. Scream in pain; groan. 3. Scream collectively (during a ritual, or to welcome guests).. ereremou.

behavior of the. tuyemou.

they are the only ones who frequently eat tapir. shama the pe iyai ayao heparoai.

to be the only one in a given situation, to do something alone or separately. paroai.

to be brother-in-law of many people who live in different places. heriprawe.

1. to lie down or be lying down in the direction of the length of the hammock (with the body parallel to the edges). 2. to tense a rope or liana (parallel to the ground); to extend horizontally; to extend a liana from one bank to another of a stream (to cross it, holding onto it). karere.

speak of upstream. yorofi wa si ha tiyekini.

upstream. yorofi.

tense bow. rahaka hetho.

bow. hetho.

the old man that I killed in the war. fipa ya si re turekeaprai.

he tied a monkey. turekeaprai.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to splash or sprinkle someone or something once. hamishiai.

to have painted one. momihimokei.

he put a gourd with water and smoothed his hair with wet hands. mãu ke the u hore wãri ha pakini the miki wãri hokokooma.

I have my hair cut irregularly (= I have my hair cut badly). ya miki wãrekã no.

hair, head of hair. miki.

to have heard, to have listened (to someone's death). yimika tarayou.

to have heard, to have listened. tarayou.

to be completely wrinkled, crumpled or creased. rurukuru.

the pointed sticks used for scratching during the unokaimou ritual, the hekura lean on them and carry them, red like blood, on their chests. kanapi hi re teaamaiwehei, pei ke pe kanarepi iye yakiraai.

small pointed stick. kanare hi.

put them there, there where there are many of them. kihami pe ta kutaru, pe re komãrãhãri hami.

where there are many of them. komãrãhãri.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani.

to shake (iterative). ripukutaai.

I don. mikimikipi.

visitors revive the pain by trampling the ground. the pe nini kashuuhe.

to be talkative (lit: to have a talkative pain). wã kashuu.

pain that amplifies, a significant message that visitors are about to arrive (they trample the ground and thus revive the pain). kashuu.

desires. desea.

canalete. kanareto.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

the woman, who was coming out of isolation after her first period, walked slowly. suwe a shuhuhuru huu prihãtou hooma.

very, much. hooma.

to shiver; to tremble with fever; to have convulsions. rahirahimo.

to a certain point. wãhasta.

to feel unwell. puhi he tharehewe.

to feel unwell. tharehewe.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on top of the basket to keep it in place. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

The cries of Woman-picure went far away. thomiriyoma ke a wã wãhami a kopema.

Woman-picure (a mythological figure). thomiriyoma.

in the forest there are fallen fruits [hirerarei, perf. wapu pe hirawe.

to place a heavy object on one. hirerarei.

to diminish, to become smaller, to narrow. sipiai.

infested with worms. moshufawe.

The mushroom sprouts on dead wood; it is edible. Shiãshirimi brota sobre la madera muerta; es comestible.

mushroom (unidentified (animal, plant)). shiãshirimi.

a great quantity of termites swarmed in the water. mãu u hami komi konaki tishoshama.

a compact group. tishoshama.

to receive leftovers. mra.

families. familias.

to renounce an aggression or revenge. puhi asimorayou.

to renounce an aggression or revenge. asimorayou.

the ancestor of the fixed eyes (having just been skinned) submerged in the Maharapiwei river. maharapiwei u ha poreri a mamoku royokowe kepariyoma.

to have fixed eyes. royokowe.

to wait for the death of an animal. nomamakei.

since you have the habit of obtaining pendants from others, put them in the lobes of my ears (= offer me those metal pieces). wa no hutukapi teapra ma kutaeni, hei pei ya yimikaki ha a ta huupari.

pendants. hutukapi.

they appeared; one and the other were big. the kipi wawet theiai.

to slip and fall on one. theiprakei.

we will smoke the birds, little brother. kirithami pema pe makeprape, oãsi.

to smoke (birds, meat, etc.). makeprape.

blue jay, azure jay; Cyanocorax violaceus (Corvidae). piyawa namo.

to be completely extinguished. wãnonowe.

edge (inner or outer) of the foot. mamiki roroku.

edge. roroku.

(he/she) goes upriver. shiporima thotho.

upriver. shiporima.

I don't have a quid of tobacco under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a quid of tobacco under the upper lip. hopou.

he killed the children in the absence of their parents. pe hii re the pe no kupramou tehe, ihiru re pe shei re shoatariyouwei (mit.

he arrived at a place where there were blue-headed parrots (scattered in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema (mit.

that are or are put in a certain state; it always implies a dispersion. hapramouwei.

to tear off a portion of a round object for oneself. hahathorei.

when Siroromi stood up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

to press or hold the legs together against each other. hututukei.

truth. peheti.

offering of meat. reahu.

to offer meat. reho.

wait a moment, I'm going to put the honey aside. waiha pei ke ya u pe shiroprai kupe.

classify; separate, to put together objects of the same class. shiroprai.

I will come to visit (lit. ya huko pe yororowe waehetariyo.

I will come to visit. waehetariyo.

to return on one. yaparayou.

tree that naturally has many folds. turarawe.

to disperse to do a battue or a search. rãkokoãi.

to begin to regain consciousness (when one is under the effect of some hallucinogen). wakakaprou.

I have the impression that there is a lot of honey in that nest. puu a no no nihio re totihiopiwe.

to have the impression of a large quantity. totihiopi.

they buried sticks at the exit of the burrow (to block the hole). hiki ithãkemahe, pei ke pekapi kasi hami.

to plant, to insert vertically in the ground. ithãkema.

when he recovers consciousness, he will start climbing again. a harou tehe a tuo kope.

to recover consciousness (after fainting or being under the effect of a hallucinogen). harorayou.

whirlpool, eddy. motoheri.

accompany him/her. a ta yauiki.

accompany him/her. yauiki.

to grow (a child), to heal. hatuke.

to be or put in a container or cavity. titihi.

to be very thin. tipikitipikirimi.

immediately she rubbed against him, and she insulted him. e mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma.

to insult, to offend by publicly proclaiming someone. suweni.

this does not get to boil. the yorupraroimi.

the day did not arrive and the ancestor was already awake. pe the mi harupraroimi totihiwe ha porepore a rãi ha kuparuni (mit.

not arrive at, not get to. raropraroimi.

the beast has killed. yaro kahiki no kiriama (mit.

to kill and devour someone (a jaguar), to bite (a snake). kiriai.

to go on a visit, to depart to visit another community. fhama huu.

Rabipelado arrived at the community he was visiting. nãroriwe a hama ha aruherini, yahi hami a koproma.

to visit. fhama.

hammock. moena.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

to have a superficial wound. yahea.

uncles, they would not be lying. shori, pe hore pewe ma ta thawe.

same brother-in-law. fperihi.

to dent or deform in multiple places (perfective, terminative, plural object). wãukumararei.

ithore 2 vb. ithore 2 vb. trans. trans. t ithoreamai, caus. t ithoreamai, caus. : to curve, to bend something. : curvar, doblar una cosa.

to curve. curvar.

to clean an object, make white, paint or color white. aupramai.

to probe (incomplete aspect). hipiai.

to see in dreams people who are far away, or to see distant places. kuramai.

they traveled a long distance. pe praharayoherima.

they traveled a long distance. praharayoherima.

the palms of pijiguao do not have fruits (= they have not flowered). rasha si pe furoko.

tibia. furoko.

they understood well, they comprehended well. fwã shi katehewe hiriãi.

to have understood well, to have comprehended well. katehewe.

they had only recently been cremated. the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

recent, new. tutoo.

to be submerged completely. shototowe.

small bananas. kuratha naki.

small. naki.

you express yourself really well (during the ceremonial dialogue). waheki aka tao re totihiowei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to speak, to be able to speak (a young child); to speak fluently; to participate correctly in ceremonial dialogues; to be hospitable; to participate in gifts and exchanges. taowei.

ser conversador. wã kashu.

to be talkative. kashu.

he prepared a tobacco quid while it was dawning. the mi haruu tehe pee nahe tihirutaarema.

he prepared a tobacco quid. tihirutaarema.

black fly, gnat. pareto.

Translation:. hokotomari uthãhi.

I have just killed a woman (lit: I have poured water). mã u ya u riprarei kuhe.

water. uthã.

skeleton of a dead spider monkey in the forest. fpasho.

older brother, they dragged me twisting my arms. apawe yare poko re ãihiprariherihe ye.

they dragged me twisting my arms. ãihiprariherihe.

to spread out, to extend (in surface area); to become wide (a hammock). hauhai.

to be locally reddened by the sun. hetetea.

we seized a woman in their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to seize a woman by force to hand her over to another person. shairema.

to sit or squat (plural subject). rookei.

softened vine. yaprotema.

you know very well that he is small. a ma re ihirui.

he is small. ihirui.

to bend something upwards, to curve something upwards. yãprekamai.

he hung his own skin on the end of one of the poles of his shelter. kama e nahi ora ha siki rukeparema.

he hung it on the end of one of the poles of his own shelter. rukeparema.

hallucinogenic drug. aluuna.

I turned my torso to the side and, bending, tensed my bow. re ya nahi ikokai tutakaoma.

I turned my torso to the side and, bending, tensed my bow. tutakaoma.

río abajo, en el conuco, no hay realmente sino dos racimos cortos de plátanos. porakapi kuratha ke kipi wai onohowe yaua totihia kupiyekiri.

short, brief; briefly, to do something for a short time. onohoã.

when the fire was fully lit, Siroromi appeared. kai ke wake pata parai hitititou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

they entered the dwelling when they were fully painted. the pe yãmou hititiprou tehe shapono hami pe harayoma.

to be fully realized, to be fulfilled, to come to an end. horiã.

to stagger, to stumble from weakness. rakiki.

they will give you an arrowhead. wa ãtãri ãhi prapehe.

to fix, tie firmly. ãteteãi.

the cassava plants fell off detaching from the root. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

to fall off, to become detached from the root. poru.

This name designates two plants of the same family, which grow in humid soils or along watercourses: Heliconia revoluta and Heliconia hirsuta, bijao (Heliconiaceae). yatas.

plant. yatas.

to miss frequently (when shooting). mimri.

Rana arched her back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch, to be arched. hiketeo.

(a word used in the southern Orinoco region). ishãpina.

to be hit by an arrow and fall from a hammock. waheprou.

at the moment when (the beast) was going to crush the turtle with its teeth, the hekura stopped it (saying ushu. totori a mori watikiprai tehe, hekura peni "--ushu. ushu. ushu. to prevent that misfortune). ".

interjection used to stop someone from doing something undesirable. ushu!.

to make love (jokingly). hishãhishãmou.

to make love (said by a man). wa*mou.

he tied the capuchin monkey's tail around his head, and smoothed it with his hand. ha yohoreni, the teshina hokokama.

tied the capuchin monkey. yohoreni.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

they (two) produced shavings from the ceiba wood, and these turned into many bocón fish and hatate (in a myth). mahe siki re yakekapiiwei mãrohã, hatate pe pruka kuprou shoaoma.

to sharpen, to point (a stick, stakes, a piece of wood). yakekai.

to carry an entire prey in the mouth (animal). wahahupou.

por aquí, en esta dirección, desemboca el camino. eyemi themithemi e yo he ãhã hapraa.

Direction. themithemi.

person who likes sweet things (especially banana porridge). kretemosiwe.

noise that arrows make. tãrãtãrã.

to become brighter, to clear up (the sky, the clarity of the day). hirahaai.

to fall one after another (fruits). shithãprou.

the egg of gallineta that you cooked (at a certain time of the day). hãshimo wa nathe re hariprei.

that was here a moment ago. hariprei.

to fill; to make someone eat until satiated. petimarei.

the tree stump is short. hii nanoka manakoroa.

1. To cut a tree as close to the ground as possible, leaving a short stump. 2. To make an arrowhead from bamboo that is too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakoro.

I, and not the others. pefermo.

large nauseating mushrooms (of the yore species) sprouted inclined. yore pe pata kaihou shoaoma.

to sprout inclined, to lean, to tilt. kaihou.

they hid it near the entrance. pei yoka horeope ha a hithea shoakemahe.

to hide, to conceal something. hitheai.

to separate to live in two dwellings situated close to each other. poamai.

man who, in life, was a good bird hunter. fhiki poko nohi peyepou.

good bird hunter. peyepou.

his liver fell to the ground, he lost his liver. pitha hami kama ke the amoku kea shoarayoma, kama amoku hoyarayoma.

to lose an organ (in mythology). hoyarayoma.

to untie, loosen (the knot that attaches the bowstring to the bow). hãto nahi moroshi ikukuprou.

go, remove the bowstrings from your bows. pei, hãto ke nahipe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

bowstring, cord of the bow. moroshi.

we slowly stretched our necks to see. opisi ke yamaki oraki yarehou.

1. to raise the head, stretch the neck to see over something, raise the chin when walking in deep waters; 2. to extend the arm to grab something. yarehe.

noise that is made. shãkãushãkãumo.

they had already built the shelters (in the forest). the pe hãto nahimoã waikirayoma.

to build a temporary shelter or collective dwelling. fãto.

fratafratawe. ãmoku*.

to keep horizontally (a long object), to maintain horizontal. reremapou.

to move a person away. koa wake shetekeai.

to move away. shetekeai.

as I am attentive (I asked) that they grate cassava (and make casabe) for my father-in-law who lives downstream and is hungry. ya puhi ha taoni, hei koro hami, hei shoaye a hoã ohiri re peripiyei.

behave (small child). peripiyei.

Tucán voló a su vez en dirección a la liana rota que todavía se balanceaba, y se aferró a ella. thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepiritha1 vb.

distenderse, estirarse hacia abajo (como un elástico al que se le cuelga un objeto). yatukuai.

to have leveled, to have flattened. resisirayou.

they slept during the night and felt well, they had already dreamed. titi ha pe ha mioni the pe totihorayoma, pe the pe maharimou waikioma.

to dream without ceasing (southern Orinoco dialect). fmaharimou yashushou.

to dream; to have a nightmare. fmaharimou.

to predict that. nihitaprariyo.

that conuco is yours (yours and theirs). kahe wamaki hikaripi theka.

that. kahe.

the hairs of the atayu caterpillar. atayu niosiki.

1. Scales of fish. 2. Hairs of caterpillar.. niosiki.

Moro approached (the tree hollow), went inside and ate the honey. moro a ha ihetaruni a rukea ha shoariherini, puu u pe watayoma.

to loosen, to come loose, to barely hold on. iheai.

to obtain little, to receive little, to kill many prey. wairei.

to be partially visible. waehea.

they will dream, they will have presages. pe wãri maharimope, pe wãri thapimope (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to presage in dreams (e.g. the arrival of visitors). poremo.

to renounce. proprokai.

the hekura went to kill the dog (or: the shamans traveled in immaterial form to go kill the dog). hekura peni hiima ke a nohi washuai ha kuparuheni.

to take a woman without authorization, to seduce a woman with the help of an accomplice, to convince a woman to befriend a man. washurei.

bead threader fish. morohoto thoku.

bead threader. morohoto.

to be decorated with a series of short parallel lines, like the drawings on the body of a kasha husi caterpillar. parotowe.

they introduced a pluma caudal de loro into the lobe of each of their ears. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya ke teshinaki huuararema.

they introduced (plumas caudales de loro) into the lobes of their ears. huuararema.

to have become deformed. koheherayou.

to have one's first menstruation and also it can be The word 'yipimou' in Yanomami means 'first menstruation'. yipimou.

after she had her first period, her husband deflowered her. a ha yipimoruni pe heãropini ka thaa shoarema.

to have one. yipimou.

the otter was curled up in a small hole. wãisikiripi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã.

to be curled up, to be compressed, to be coiled. hikiniã.

to grow (human), to make an arrow slightly longer than usual. tirehou.

you are always whimpering. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to sob, to whimper. eheehemou.

I feel like vomiting. ya no suharayopi.

1. To swallow, to pass through the esophagus. 2. To vomit, to regurgitate.. suha.

they were already hanging by their arms, the ancestors had turned into sloths. the pe yakukuprawe waikiwe ha, poreri ke the ihamarariyoma.

to hang or be hanging by the arms; to be hanging by arms and legs with the head down (like sloths), to hang with all one. yakukuai.

they went to shoot arrows at the vultures. watupa re ke ki niyãi mi re ukukeiwei.

I will be the one to shoot arrows at the advancing outsiders. kamiyeni ware ya ki ora niyai koo.

to shoot an arrow, to launch a projectile. niyãi.

the son of Jaguar was mute. ira ihirupi e aka porepi re kuonowei (mit.

to be mute; to be unable to speak the Yanomami language; to be unable to participate in ceremonial dialogues. nowei.

to be very angry. shiotoreshiotoremi.

the conucos where we used to go to get plantains are nearby. kuratha yama pe re tepraaperei ha, the ahete praa kurarei.

the place where we used to go to get plantains. tepraaperei.

perfective of the inchoative form (to start walking through the forest). yashokorayou.

Arrendajo grabbed her by the twisted cotton thread that she carried around her chest. ãyãkorãriweni shinari re iki re hareponowei ha a huwerema.

she carried it around her chest. hareponowei.

anaconda; Eunectus murinus (Boidae). It is eaten. Associated with water; it helps shamans approach hot areas when they are looking for a pei mi ãmo.. wãikoyãriwe.

I am no longer a little one (humorous antiphrase, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

fledgling that loses its down, fledgling. harurupi.

unable to be extracted or removed using a utensil (like a gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikeproimi.

when he had eaten all the bones produced by the cremation, Espíritu-luna moved along the ground in a crouching position. oshohore ke ki hititiarei yaro, periporiwe ke a pata hãmorimou ha shoaparuni.

all of them climbed, all ascended laboriously. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

to move along the ground, to crawl on the ground, to climb laboriously. hititiarei.

on the summit, on the peak (of a mountain, of a hill). fpororo hami.

two. hami.

to cough. thokomou.

why would I always give my goods without reclaiming anything in return. weti ke the ha shiroko ha ipa ya ki hore totohai ta kutuwe.

without reclaiming anything in return. kutuwe?.

to become iridescent, shimmering. terere.

in each occasion the ancestors let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

to let escape, to allow to flee, to facilitate escape. yashu.

to dry by heat, to smoke. tetek.

I wait for the cassava to mature before eating it. nashi ya koko etemai.

to pass from light to dark, to become tanned or bronzed; roots of cassava and ocumo tubers that darken as they mature. eteãi.

to become soft, to soften, to weaken, to lose strength. pahakoko.

to break, to remove. hahathoai.

give me onoto. a no nanapi ta yãpari.

onoto, a reddish-brown dye or pigment made from the seeds of the achiote tree. yãpari.

to have been completely torn or cut into several strips. sherira.

they have to gather leaves and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'only'. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe.

if only I could enjoy a broth. ya the pouku wãri ha totihiarini.

some time passed, then he left and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'it'. the no ha tetetaruni a korãyoma.

he gave it to me and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'say'. the hipepema.

rómpe si koropirimi me una rama con frutas moshima and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'to'. the ki ta keprari, pei ke siki.

they. the.

there where a nest of koshiro bees is found, I will go to gather honey (lit. ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni.

a species of bees. koshiro.

(name). ahe.

to have tobacco preserved by piling leaves on top of each other and making balls to keep them dry. ithorip.

a metaphorical term for woman (wife, daughter, sister). misikiri hena.

spiny palm plant. misikiri.

to kick violently. kahathoprakei.

while Oso hormiguero daba vueltas por detrás, la mujer regresó directamente a su casa. teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe poreporeriyoma a katitia re korayoheriiwei.

to return directly to one. korayoheriiwei.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to pull, to tear off. huwereni.

the people of Tayari shot their arrows from far away, many arrows that missed the target. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikaihe, pruka shereka ke ki tishikamahe.

they missed the target. tishikamahe.

the packages (of fish) had just finished cooking when a heavy rain began to fall. pe pe hãro ripiprou hititio tehe, yetu maa ke pe horã pata re petarurei.

cooked (perfective). ripirayou.

the Yanomami have acclimatized it in their plantations to revive it (lit. los Yãnomãmi lo han aclimatado cía para resucitarlo (lit. : to make its breath come out again). : para hacer que su hálien sus plantaciones.

acclimatize. aclimatar.

he didn't show it to the others, he hid it. a tapramanomihe, ai pe rii ha, a ithepomahe.

show, point out, teach. tapramai.

they found fallen fruits on the ground. rua ke mo hiraa ha tarariheni.

they found. tarariheni.

he who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and without waiting deflowered her. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei (mit.

to have the leg swelling. fmatha shekekeai, inc.

leg, hind leg. waiwei.

tree, vine; Parkia pendula (Leg. moshiriwe kathohi.

tree, vine; Parkia pendula (Leg., Mimosaceae). moshiriwe.

how to do it. weti naha.

what does this look like. weti naha the mimou kuwe.

how do you weave a basket. weti naha wa the rii tuyei kuaatii.

what could that be. weti naha wa ta thawe.

how, what, how much, what kind. naha.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic). wãhe.

to be located at the stern of a canoe to steer it; to operate a motor vehicle (neol.). koro te.

we start running again and we approach quickly. yamaki rereai kuaai kooheri ha, yetu ke yamaki titetetariyoma.

we approach quickly. titetetariyoma.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to divide, separate, fracture, split into parts. sheteka.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to carry something under the arm, to carry an object tucked between the skin and the loincloth; to keep an object pressed. hãkip.

(to speak of upriver). krimo.

he tapped his teeth rapidly (with his index finger). pei e naki hupehupemoma.

he/it. pei.

pedir ser invitado. wã no ohiãmou.

to invite. ohiãmou.

1. To become soft, sink, deform by softening or loosening (roof of a house, cassava bread, etc.). 2. To fall one after another, fall as dust, fragment and fall. wihihi.

the female white-lipped peccary ancestors moved in the center (of the herd). wareriyoma mi ãmo hami pe huma.

mythical female ancestor or spirit associated with the white-lipped peccary. wareriyoma.

to crease. plisarse.

to become clear, limpid, translucent (terminative form). herushiprou.

to be hungry. hãhãmiyoma.

to produce fear, to scare; to intimidate, to shame someone. kirimararei.

he devoured his brain entirely. pe the he yoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

brain, marrow, gizzard of crab. yoshipe.

to have firm, upright breasts. fhãkãmiki shererewe.

she had the breasts of a growing young woman, she was truly a young woman. suwe ke pe patai kure naha e hãkãmiki, moko totihiwe.

breasts (of the same person). hãkãmiki.

lye powder. hapromi hiki.

soap, lye. hapromi.

deposited the fire on the dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke ﬁ pata poko fewe ha, wake makekema.

abandoned wasp nest. fhewe.

to dry, to smoke, to cure (a wound). fe.

naming (him/her/it). piyekerei.

when day came, he returned directly to his house. the mi haruu tehe kama yahi hami a katitiwe korãyoma.

frankly, without intermediaries; directly; correctly; really, truly. katitiwe.

I abandoned the region where I lived. ipa ya hiki hãii ha kuikuni.

to abandon a region where one lived. yãrãremai.

to have good luck during a search (for honey, hunting, etc.). wetiamai.

to tap or flick with fingers to remove dirt or insects. yootho.

encima de la roca yacía una tragavenado. pei ke maki heaka hami hokoto keki re waririonowei.

hizo caer la tragavenado muerta al agua. mãrewa hokoto keki pata nomawe nihoroã shoamaparema.

tragavenado, Boa constrictor (Boidae). hokoto.

tree; Mabea sp. (Euphorbiaceae). ushipi.

his wife was underneath, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

to place an object underneath another, to place at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pehitheakirioma.

just when I was fleeing, my bow got caught in the vegetation, and I pulled it several times to free it. ya tokuu tehe hãto nahi rukekema, hãto re ya nahi ikokama.

to get caught, to get hooked. rukekema.

Tucán utilizó afrodisíaco y así transformó la mente de la mujer (para seducirla y llevársela a su casa). mayepirithaweni a ha kumireni suwe ke a puhipe yai tharariyoma.

to transform the mind (for seduction). tharariyoma.

she, a woman; she repeats incessantly: "peshi e, peshi e. cha. ", thus expressing her carnal desire. , hekura del sexo femenino; ella repite sin cesar: "peshi e, peshi e.

to awaken sexual desire. peshimorãyou.

to tear or rip lengthwise, to cut or tear an incomplete strip along the edge of an object. sheririai.

parrot; it repeats everything it hears. werehiriwe.

raised leaves. posusuwe.

to swell, to become swollen (in one place). si thororoai.

to be swollen in several places; to be completely swollen. si thororowe.

to swell, to become swollen. thororo.

he dyed the worked face of the bamboo tip with hosho u (perfumed annatto dye). hosho ke u peni rahaka a mi yãprãrema.

he painted/dyed. yãprãrema.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

to separate the two cotyledons of a momo fruit to remove the embryo (which is eaten separately). iprushiai.

I really have the urge to defecate. ya shi ihe totihiwe ma ta yaitani.

to have the urge to defecate. shi.

a dream made us foresee your arrival. wa thapi kuo shoao k u p r e i.

foresee. k u p r e i.

a metaphorical term for woman (wife, daughter, sister). misikiri hena.

spiny palm plant. misikiri.

the sun is already declining. mothoka kaiwe waikiwe.

to be inclined, to be oblique. kaiprawe.

the arrow got stuck in a branch and they asked him to go get it. shereka a ha shatiikuni a nosiyemamahe: "a ta thaprari", e pe kuma.

to go get something, to fetch something. thaprari.

to pierce, to make a hole (once) using a pointed object. hiroshai.

to let the meat start to rot (through negligence). thopokopiprou.

"Father-in-law. shoape. Father-in-law. shoape. " he shouted. e komima.

he advanced shouting. the komii kuaama.

to call out, to shout. komima.

cleared path. kakeai kukei.

to clear vegetation with the foot to make a path. kakeai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kurorei.

piece of wood provided with a notch that is placed at the end of an arrow, in which the bowstring is placed during a shot and also it can be The word 'mayepi' in Yanomami means 'bejuco masimasi'. mayepi shereka (pei) naka.

(no clear translation provided). mayepi.

the ancestors were great shamans and resurrected, do you know them well. pata the pe re hekuramonowei, the pe re horipronowei, wa the pe mi ãhã rakiprou thawe.

they were great shamans and resurrected. hekuramonowei.

null. kuatomi.

a moment ago I caught a dove. hoya ya wai tihekiprarei kuroi.

to catch several small birds with an arrow whose tip has the shape of a fork with three or four points. tihekiprarei.

they (two) put the package of fish to roast on the coals. yuri ke ã hãro re yapipeiwei.

they put the package of fish to roast on the coals. yapipeiwei.

to return on one. yapataai.

are you all painted and adorned. wamaki paushimoã haikiprariyo ta kuhawe.

to be about to go and get oneself adorned by another. paushipramou.

to become viscous or sticky. yoripiai.

we fished upstream from where the Karesisiwe river flows into another river. karesisiwe u re papohori ha pemaki yuri kããma.

river that flows into another river. karesisiwe.

Tucán utilizó afrodisíaco y así transformó la mente de la mujer (para seducirla y llevársela a su casa). mayepirithaweni a ha kumireni suwe ke a puhipe yai tharariyoma.

transformed the mind. kumireni.

I don. mamokahiwe.

colic, diarrhea. kriikrii.

I take beads (I take a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to take, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãoãrãrei.

Onom., noise of arrows clashing together. tai!.

they eat. pe iyaprou.

1. To start eating. 2. To eat (plural subject). 3. To consume the ashes of a deceased person, to organize a funeral ceremony.. iyaprou.

shotgun pellets. fkopeta moku.

empty cartridge. fkopeta mo sisi.

shotgun, rifle. fkopeta.

to have stiff and stuck together hair when wet. shititi.

I'm going to tie the ends of the leaves of the package to be cooked. ya the hãro he ãtetepei.

1. to fix, tie firmly; 2. to tie a headband around the forehead when having a headache; 3. to fold and tie the ends of leaves containing food to be cooked on embers; 4. the state of a package tied in that way to be roasted. ãtete.

they heard the sobs of the child. ihiru a miã wã hirimahe.

the nearby song of the paujíes is heard. ei paruri ke pe miã pata ahetewe totihiwe.

his wife cried for him (after his death). pe suwepi e miã no preoma.

Cries, sobs; mournful song of the paují and doves. hirimahe.

to become sensitive to the taste of rancid butter or oxidized fats, as a consequence of violating the prohibition of consuming game meat accompanied with pijiguaos. ãsikeprou.

Supernatural beings responsible for epidemics and certain diseases. shawara*.

in this direction are my conuco and my house. kiha ke ya hikaripi praa kupiyeheri, ya shaponopi praa kure.

are. kupiyeheri.

to warn someone who killed a person and performs the unokaimou ritual that, if they are not careful, they will scratch themselves with their nails instead of with a sharp stick as required by the ritual (risking getting sores all over their body). tikokopramou.

poorly formed or sparse bunch of banana and/or peach palm. fmashishipi ke ki.

sparse, thin (plants, hair); said when the tubers of a yam plant are not abundant. fmashishipi ke ki: poorly formed or sparse bunch of banana and/or peach palm. fmashishipi.

to dig deeply, to deepen a hole. tarok.

to fill; to make someone eat until satiated. petimarei.

wait, I'll be back soon. waiha, ya huu koo haiowe.

soon, quickly. haiowe.

I will cover with water the wapu fruits (while they are cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to cover with water a food that is cooking. paopei.

they lie down together. mohe yoteai.

to lie down together. yoteai.

to soften (the ground), to become muddy (terminative). kaweheprou.

I will give it only to him. kama ke iha ya the hipei makokokei.

alone. makokotoo.

to repeat 'asi yai' several times in succession. asiprao.

to shorten (point of). pookosi.

to become satiated. poteheprou.

the arrow cane of the ãiãmo people is downriver. ãiãmori pe sherekapi si roo yaiokiri (cha.

warrior, violent, aggressive, bloodthirsty and merciless people. ãiãmo.

to change the subject, especially when not wanting to comply with a request. hãrokei.

the beast has killed and also it can be The word 'yaro' in Yanomami means 'that'. yaro kahiki no kiriama (mit. It is a Pronoun. ).

I have laziness because I take too many hallucinogens. ya mohi epena pruka ya pe koai yaro.

due to her being pregnant and not being able to run, the jaguar ate her. the shipenapi yaro, the haiprou ha maoni irani the warema (mit.

the beast. yaro.

Rabipelado was crushed under the rock and the macaw people rolled on his shattered remains on the ground to paint themselves. nãroriwe pei ke makini a nahihoma, a nahihiwe yapikope hami arari pe tihirumoma.

crushed, shattered, crumbled, crumbled. hiwe.

if you sleep without fire you will get elephantiasis in the testicles. wa ruwemou tehe wa natheki wakapirayou.

elephantiasis in the testicles. wakapirayou.

the white arrows of the chupacacao negro are covered with longitudinal lines. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to do it (trace longitudinal lines) on several objects. shetitirarei.

(related form of yakeke). he yakeke.

to become soft, to soften, to weaken, to lose strength. pahakoko.

when Siroromi got up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

to hold someone immobilized between the thighs. hututurei.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be damaged, to be crushed (end of a long object). thekehe.

to rest, to regain breath. wãshimi horuu.

to rest for a moment, to regain breath for a moment. wãshimi horu tou.

to rest, to regain breath. horuu.

they must have made love, the fresh mark of their bodies is visible on the ground. ke kipi nami wãri kãi wamoma, heyeha the kipi nohori wãri tute praa.

mark, imprint, indentation left on the ground. nohori.

to cause to slide and fall (long object, especially arrows). wekeamai.

no te metas el anzuelo en la boca, porque corres el riesgo de tragártelo. uhea a hopotihe, wa suharei.

mouth. hopotihe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). makoyopi.

to give the urge to urinate. niaasi keyeamai.

(perfective) helped someone urinate. niaasi keyemarei.

to give the urge to urinate, to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, sick person or elderly person to urinate. keyeamai.

the rocky wall of Mount Yaapiwe is high. yaapiwe ki pata re tirerakiri ye.

Yaapiwe (proper noun). yaapiwe.

they felt then a great concern (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to be worried/concerned about someone (terminative aspect). haruhuprou.

to begin to slit the abdomen of an animal (fish or mammal) to empty it. ekokoprai.

The indigenous people remove these animals with spines or needles. hihaespinas.

to remove parasites with spines or needles. hihaespinas.

they had hollow tubes along their sides. pei the pe repoku hami thora re ke ki hiririprawe (cha.

to have hollow tubes along their sides (plural object, dispersed). hiririprawe.

the fire is slowly going out. koa wake wãnonoãi.

to slowly extinguish, to gradually go out (a fire). wãnonoãi.

Carpintero enano se hinchó y la plataforma (sobre la cual estaba colocado el cadáver) se distendió. hii hiki noshi hariraama.

1. To carry a splendid attire; to be very beautiful. 2. To extend, deploy (night); to distend, dilate. harirai.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma.

faint noise, barely perceptible. Warakuawe.

gray hair. ire.

twins. mamisiki.

the flood waters came pushing the Waika people in front of it. motu ke u hai ha kuikuni, waika ke pe pararumai ha kuikuni (mit.

to lead someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child); to make someone walk in front of oneself; to push something in front of oneself (e.g. fishing baskets). pararuamai.

to be isolated again. yawerou.

Siroromi crushed his body completely, and when he had finished he stuck his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

to crush or grind completely. hititirarini.

and at arriving put the package of fish to cook on the embers. yuri e hãro yapaharoma.

put to cook on the embers. yapaharoma.

to press, to squeeze. hisiniãi.

you know very well that he is small. a ma re ihirui.

he is small. ihirui.

to shake (a wet animal, a dog). yomisiprou.

to invite someone to come live nearby; to bring something closer. ahetaha.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to curve sharply downward. wahohowe.

they all went to take refuge in the place where the cacao plants have their tops leaning. pohoroa ana hiki pata raiope ha, pe komi he ruoma.

to lean, to bend down, to give way. raiope.

to cry for a dead person or pet, to mourn and express it by crying; to lament. hushihipi*.

he deposited the fire on the dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke ﬁ pata poko fewe ha, wake makekema.

to be dry (wood). hewe.

to strengthen, to make firm (durative, plural object). rohothomai.

to have enlarged (a surface). hauhumakei.

when he arrived at a medium height (of the tree). pe peshekutohorayou tehe.

upriver, or at a certain height. -vhv-rayo-.

to empty little by little. mathoko.

they went hunting (this morning). pe rãmi ayou ke a kuroi.

my older brother went hunting. ãiwe a rãmi huma.

hunt. rãmi.

cooked (plural objects), perfective. ãmiãkei.

El Bello (Õmawe) plantó la hoja en el suelo. katehe a yai re kuini hena ithãparema.

to plant. toma.

he removed the bladed object with handle that he was wearing around his neck, and put it on the ground. haoa a re hayuprareiwei, a wai ha prakini.

an object with a handle or haft attached by being wedged into a split stick. haoama.

in the places where the paths meet (entering a dwelling) one only finds ugly and bad people. pei yoka horeape ha wãriti the pe hãtopi ma re shiro reawei.

to be a little damaged. wãritihi.

to be partially vertical. wapoa.

the animals that move on the trees were the first of all to climb. isi hami pe re huuwei, pe hititiwe tua pariketayoma.

were the first to climb. pariketayoma.

he transported his two children in the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemarema.

to transport something placed on top of something else; to transport a child seated on a load; to transport in a canoe. tikemarei.

Micrastur ruficollis (Falconidae), a bird of prey species. kãwãmãri.

the water boils. u yoruu.

to boil, to bubble, to be effervescent. yoru.

skin of the Apparition, lifeless image of the Apparition. pore siki.

plastic bag. matiriawe siki.

the external envelope, the form, the appearance of beings. sikã.

to deflate, to press locally. ãhuhuãkei.

the small bamboo arrowhead is really very sharp. rahaka ke a wai hitotowe totihiwe.

bamboo. hitotai.

wait, wait, don't be in a hurry, listen. waiha, waiha, shi harimotihe, yimika ta taiku.

don. harimotihe.

to acquire the color that certain plant products take when oxidized, like potatoes and cassava after being peeled for some time; also the color that certain banana compotes take if not consumed immediately. mishi ruthe.

to acquire a certain color. ruthe.

to give a crab to a man to bite into while following the unokaimou ritual. washishiprai: darle un cangrejo para mordisquear a un hombre que está siguiendo el ritual unokaimou.

to crush or bite into something completely with the incisors. washishiprou.

their hands are like ours (yours and mine). ei peheki imiki re kuprai naha the pe imiki rii kuprawe.

their hands. kuprawe.

do not insist on repeating that, that is what I say. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

to insist, to persist, to be obstinate. yati.

to drip (water). here warorai.

After climbing up the trunk, Toucan slid down to descend. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni.

to drip (water), to slide (hand or fingers along something), to descend from a tree sliding down the trunk. warorai.

(a type of leaf). pisha.

they (the two of them) transformed into the omãyãri demon, making it dangerous everywhere, that is how diseases were created (myth) (southern Orinoco dialect). ke kipi re omãyãrirariyouwei, ihi a wayuamai aka praukou re kutariyouwei, ke ki shawara kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to make dangerous. wayuamai.

to share the food of others (joking). fw are a ni hoã re oore.

to share the food of others. oore.

the hekura started smiling. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma o a kasi watetou yakea ayakema.

to smile. wateo.

to lie on one. rorokup.

to lower the head abruptly. teiprakei.

tree, wood. kana-.

small toucan, yellow-billed toucan. katakatami.

my eyes became red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

to have reddened eyes; to have the beginning of conjunctivitis. wakerariyo.

to cause to have pain. hãmori.

clay used to make pots. fapoka.

quality of a hearth. hãto nahi iyomamou.

quality. iyo.

to have painted one. momihimokei.

lay down (perfective). hãkohokei.

to lie down with someone (iterative). hãkohotaai.

to lie down, to be lying down with someone in a hammock. hãkoho.

yo siempre respondo a las demandas de los hombres valientes. yãnomãmi kurahewe the pe riha ya the pe ã huamai si ihehewe.

brave. kurahe.

pith of the yagua palm. lmito.

the otter was curled up in a place where the bank was high and ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo horokoape ha, proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to be curled up in a place where the bank ends abruptly. hikoikuni.

(synonym). kakomã.

to stick out one. shipeteai.

they scattered their belongings. pe yapikamahe.

scattered, dispersed. yapikamahe.

give fish to my son, the one who is accompanying us. oãsimi pema a re nokamopore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

the one who is accompanying us. nokamopore.

Shamans are hekura and, with rare exceptions, are initiated and male. Los chamanes son hekura y, salvo raras excepciones, son iniciados y de sexo masculino.

hekura re pe kooprou ma hititio tehe, omawe ihirupini ware nohi thapou hea tahiyaa kupe (cha. hekura re pe kooprou ma hititio tehe, omawe ihirupini ware nohi thapou hea tahiyaa kupe (cha. ): although all the hekura had abandoned me, Õmawe's son was the only one who stayed to take care of me. ): aunque todos los hekura me habían abandonado, el hijo de Õmawe fue el único que se quedó para cuidar de mí.

shamans. hekura.

did it take revenge. the no wãri yurenowe.

it killed him/her (an anaconda killed him/her at the water. renowe.

they killed the peccaries and gave to drink the broth of the cooked (animals), they organized a funerary banquet. ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

they gave to drink the broth of the cooked (animal). niyamaheni.

I was afraid and startled. the auprariyoma.

I was afraid and startled. auprariyoma.

he wants to share the food of others and now he likes this house (where he is treated well). a ni niya ha rioni pe yahi puhiprai waikirayoma re.

to make someone like something; to cause someone to appreciate something. puhiamai.

ray of sun, sunlight. mothoka shii.

ray of sunlight, sunbeam. shii.

to fan a fire. koa wake yare.

a type of tree that bears large round fruits with a woody shell. makaro.

unfortunately. yaimahe.

he carried plantains hung from a vine on his back. kuratha a rukekano yehipoma.

plantains or bananas hung from a vine. rukekano.

the demon of the quicksands dragged him to the bottom of its hole. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei.

to put something at the bottom or inside (perfective form). shomikei.

(he/she) looked sideways. mamo pririkei.

(he/she) looked sideways for an instant. mamo priritou.

1. to look at something sideways 2. to suffer from divergent strabismus (very offensive in the presence of the affected person). mamo priri.

the ancestors did not take into account (lit. porepore the ki wãri yaiye pe tao, the ki wãri kuu mai, pe yaweremou no motaai.

my sibling of the opposite sex (my sister or my brother, depending on the speaker. yaiye.

not long ago they came to widen the entrance of the burrow of the babilla (to reach it and kill it). iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

to widen the opening of a burrow by making the earth fall with a machete, a bow or a pointed stick. tishiiwei.

association of -mo- with the perfective -pariy or -pariyo, always associated with an intransitive verb and usually referring to actions or acts performed in water. -moparu.

Men use dried and grated bulbs of the manaka plant over fire. Hombres utilizan bulbos secados y rallados de manaka sobre el fuego.

magical plant. manaka.

they immediately line up the poles (in myth). hiki ithãã shaniniwe ta shoararihe she.

to line up, to align. masisi.

Assist the departure of people who are leaving in a canoe. karemarei.

to be distended, to be too hardened, twisted or deformed. prihãwe.

to be happy. yapayapa.

to make love one after the other. wamopraai.

to do a somersault. mohe hoteke.

to do a somersault. hoteke.

brother-in-law, observe the water to see if it is turbid. ãsi, u ushishi kua ta mi.

turbid, murky. ushishi.

to throw multiple objects one after another, to give objects to someone by throwing them. sheyehai.

when I (get old) and start walking badly (lit. pitha ya pe wãri kapai wãritiai tehe ya yahitheriprope tao ya puhi ha kuni.

I will stay at home. yahitheriprope.

his mother-in-law went out several times through the opening situated about a meter long and the thickness of a thumb. pe yesi shikã hami ke a wãri re horetaaiwei.

to pass crouched underneath something, to walk crouched so as not to be seen. horei.

tell them to be quiet, some of them insist on saying they will go to war. a wã no wasio ta poo, ai pe the pe ã he prakehou tharei.

to insist on repeating what one said, not to change one. prakeherayou.

hacia la parte de arriba de la pendiente. fmi nono hami.

pendiente. mi nono.

to that one over there perhaps he would have also liked to accompany me. kihi sho yaheki koshekã no kororai ta totihikepi taani.

to move in a very small group of two. kororo.

when I reached the summit (feeling dizzy) I wondered what I was going to do. kihami ya re heakaai totihio kuhe tehe, weti naha wa ta thawe ya puhi kutaroma.

to elevate, to rise above, to ascend. kutaroma.

since you have women, lie down in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yãhãhemayou.

the cat moves around removing its claws. mishi imisiki kushesheaprarai.

to remove claws/nails (an animal). kusheshet.

to cram, pack tightly. hãroko.

when Siroromi got up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

squeeze for a moment. hutututou.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to spread out, space out (plants, animals). shororamai.

to have pain, to suffer (due to a blow or wound). hamii.

it was him who kept my head underwater. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object underwater by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kaokoparei.

to make deep. taroamai.

to send someone from afar an invitation to do something, articulating the lips clearly but without making any sound, in order to maintain discretion: the interlocutor has to read the lips. It often refers to a romantic rendezvous. wahatomorayou.

to redden locally by the action of the sun. hetetai.

he/she extends the arm. poko ta kasheshetaru.

to extend the arm. kasheshetaru.

to float. potai.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with dry leaves or plant residues. heshãheshãpirayou.

bluish-gray color. mishi teãpi.

bluish-gray. teãpi.

perfective inceptive of . hoterayou.

they turned around and had barely started to move away when the little frog turned into a jaguar. the pe humapi rea payekeprou tehe wawa hena ira kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to place something at a good distance, neither too far nor too close. payeketou.

go to take them pijiguaos. rasha ke e pe ta perapaharu.

to take them (pijiguaos). perapaharu.

I put it in the center (perfective, plural object). mi tharikakei.

I am putting it in the center (durative, plural object). mi tharimai.

to put something in the middle, in the center. tharikei.

Rabipelado was lying in his hammock, and suddenly he turned around (in the described way). nãroriwe ke a ha hushutoni, hesika wãri reprai yaioma, a mi wãri hemihiprou ha mahironi.

to look behind oneself, to turn around; to turn one. hemihiprou.

not being able to climb a tree. yoa yohehe.

local discoloration of the skin, that. yohehe.

to be locally narrow (hole, opening). teteã.

(he/she) speaks. huheti.

to feel bad. puhi wãrihi.

to fabricate small. wãisikiripiprai.

eyebrow. weAnat.

small sticks could be inserted into our vaginas. yaiopiwei.

small sticks could be inserted into our vaginas. yaiopiwei.

to weed. kau.

esos son nuestros viejos guayucos (los de ellos y el mío). kamiye yamaki wayukopi hote.

son los guayucos de los niños. ihiru ke pe wayukopi.

guayuco (traditional Yanomami loincloth). wayukopi.

to make war. niyayou.

if I receive an old cotton hammock in exchange, I lose. yii pe hote ha ya no peprarou.

to be at a disadvantage, to lose (in an exchange). peprarou.

yo boto las deyecciones de las abejas. pei ke ya shi pe hoyai kupe.

excrement of bees. shipe.

the hekura shot arrows at the daughter of the yawari people. taritari ke peni yãwãriyoma pe teepi a niyamahe.

another name for the hekura (a Yanomami spirit or being). taritari.

to break into several pieces. yãrãrerei.

the Yãnomãmi will never stop blowing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

to dedicate oneself entirely, to commit malevolent acts. onono.

to have reached a medium size; to have gone from a large size to a medium size, to have reduced in that way. proweherayou.

fabricar un objeto bello. riyeheprai.

to start to do something (durative, plural object). payoprai.

noise made by a more or less hard object inside a rigid container when shaken: noise of lechosa seeds, noise of chicks in the egg when shaken, etc.. rokorokomo.

she really did not manage to fall asleep. a mio shihihirio yaioma.

not manage to fall asleep, spend a bad night (often due to a worry or bad premonition). shihihirio.

to have been divided into many portions in that manner. hahathoma.

to hit laterally. yayetiai.

nevertheless, he fell into the water. pe kea he yatipariyoma.

he fell into the water. yatipariyoma.

he was lying (unconscious) on the ground, he got up again and climbed (the tree). a pratioma, hoketou re korayonowei, a tuoma (mit.

he got up again and climbed (the tree). korayonowei.

to be angry. hiraka.

to have fluidified (terminative). hereshiprou.

Interjection expressing surprise or admiration. te!.

to make someone kill. shemai.

the woman did not take long to get pregnant. yetu ke suwe e kãi shipenai re kukeiwei.

the woman was pregnant and could not go fast. suwe ke a shipenapi yaro a haiprou maoma.

to get pregnant, to become pregnant. penai.

they put me in a hammock hung from a pole and transported me like that. yare hiki re tereh e r i i w e i.

to put a sick person in a hammock hung from a pole and transport them by holding the ends of the pole. hiki te.

ikiyari. ikiyari.

go back (return to your home). a ta kopoheri.

to return home. kopoheri.

(habla de río arriba. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to tie around the waist, immobilize by holding around the waist. hãrokorei.

to steal several objects one after another. thomipraai.

null. kotori.

the child climbed the tree and shook a branch several times. ihiru ke a wai ha torereidukuni, hii poko raekama.

to shake (once). aeke.

child. oshetawe.

to start cutting down a tree with an axe. pashokoprai.

will you two go. kahe waheki hupe.

you two do it. kahe wahekini the ta thapi.

you two. kahe waheki.

tooth of picure that has been pulled out (to make a buril). hayomano.

I'm going to sit on one buttock. ya roa kayarekei.

to sit on one buttock. kayareprou.

to recover an object from that maneparuheni (cha. haprapi peni ware mori taprai kurãrekei, perf. ): the hekura were about to transmigrate in order to give it to someone. : recuperar un objeto de esa maneparuheni (cha.

the hekura (spirits of the dead) were about to transmigrate. maneparuheni.

sacarle. hi namo yakekeai.

to remove, to take out. yakekeai.

poisonous snake, splendid [Bothrops sp. waro ke ki.

to become a poisonous snake, splendid. warishanare.

I put them side by side. ya the erekekei.

to place two elongated objects side by side. erekeãi.

tail. shicaudal.

I will prepare a wad of tobacco for him. pee ya nahe humikei.

to prepare a wad of tobacco. humitaai.

did he take revenge. the no wãri yurenowe.

indicates that the speaker did not attend the event being spoken about, or did not immediately realize what was happening. yurenowe?.

to advance, to progress zigzagging. hipoyeaprarou.

to bend or curve the tip of an object. toyekekei.

to become clear, limpid, translucent. herushi.

to extend, to widen, to amplify (a surface) (durative, plural object). rerahamai.

to speak in a low voice, to whisper. fwahato wã hai.

he said to her in a low voice "Shall I make love to you. a wã wahato wayoma "ya ta wamo sho. ". ".

in a low voice, whispering. fwahato.

there was a wasp nest in the place towards which I was going, the wasps came out and I started running. pina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

let's (the two of us) burn the bee nest. kopina ke yahe hisikai.

wasp nest. pina.

he has had a fixed gaze for a while. mamoku royokotio.

the stars do not twinkle. shitikari pe mamoku pata royokoprawe.

fixed gaze. royokorãyou.

I am afraid. koãnaye ninihi.

to be afraid. koãnaye.

they are the ones who make me advance ahead as an explorer (when they go to war). re the peni yare nosi pariapramai totihiowei.

to advance ahead as an explorer. pariapramai.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water and also it can be The word 'frutos' in Yanomami means 'fruits'. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

fruits. frutos.

noise, signal that precedes the return of the hunters. fheniyomi pe heã.

an extended hunting expedition; a hunter who goes camping for several days in the forest carrying food with him, to hunt animals, which he will bring back to the dwelling after having smoked them in the camp. heniyomi.

to open, split, break partially. homo.

they wove braided mapires. moroni tima a tuyei telado.

woven, braided. telado.

why don't you want to give me toucan feathers. weti the ha wa ãhuku noshi imapou kure.

1. Set aside a gourd containing the crushed bones of a male relative, to consume its contents. 2. Kill a man.. ãhuku.

to put something into the bottom of. hushomiãi.

el cuerpo de Pájaro carpintero enano casi no tardó en ponerse azul (como si hubiera estado completamente cubierto de moretones). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

Carpintero verdoso se agarró rápidamente a un bejuco de curare que golpeó con su pico. mamokori ira ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni a tootoomoma.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama.

Pájaro carpintero verdoso (Picumnus exilis). ripuhusiriwe.

he slid behind the women's backs. suwe ke pe yaipe hami a wãri hiririãprarou.

the back. hiririãprarou.

hard objects. yakekai.

Have they finished painting themselves everywhere. wamaki yãmoã ta hititiraruhawe.

to paint, to color. heke.

they (upriver) did it in turn. kama ke e ﬁmoni a shea mi hetupirema.

to do in turn, to alternate, to change activity or instrument. ﬁmoni.

the fish bite (= the fishing is good). yuri pe weio.

to bite (fish). weikei.

dried tobacco. ía.

he carried the dog on his back. hiima ke a yehireherima.

since Hewethawe was blind, they had the custom of carrying him on the back using the hammock ropes. hewethawe a huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki hami.

(example incomplete). sipara ke a pata shutukahe yehirema.

to carry on the back. yehireherima.

to be skilled in the art of wayamou, to have eloquence. karehou.

to shake, to move abruptly. kipramai.

to soften locally. epehemakei.

(related to) to be juxtaposed. poa.

to choose to give as a gift. makehewe.

sticky, viscous. yãreke.

la nutria acostumbraba a refugiarse (= desaparecer) en un huequito. wãisikiripi ke theka wai ha proro ke a nohi mohotuoprou yaioma.

huequito. mohotuoprou.

but, have you done it already. wa ki ma ta thakihawe.

have you done it already?. thakihawe.

to sleep. hihirimo.

to become less concentrated, less thick. rehererayou.

to agitate in front of oneself, while advancing, a handful of leafy branches, as if sweeping the floor, to reintegrate the noreshi of a sick person. yãhãroãkei.

to shake something planted in the ground, to pull it out or check if it is firmly embedded. ripuku.

they wear old worn-out loincloths. wayuko yãpishipi pe rapouhe.

to wear out, deteriorate (cloth). yãpushipi.

he stopped being angry and that's why he renounced taking revenge. a wã rii ha okeheatarani a puhi rii aithaatarouwei a rii ma re kui.

renounced, gave up. aithaatarouwei.

in the conuco there are two bunches of plantains (that can be harvested). hikari theka hami porakapi kuratha ke ki yaua.

some fled. porakapi pe tokurayoma.

some, a few. dual.

to become short. homotou.

strabismus. priri .

to fall sick one after the other. haririprou.

tree. unahi.

he/she is spying, he/she is observing while hiding behind something. mi yeheo.

to spy, to observe while hiding behind something. yeheo.

when we had finished surrounding them, the enemy warriors did not respond (to our shouts and insults). wayu pe ã hai mi hetuonomi, yãnomãmi re the pe he hãyoprou tehe.

to surround them. hetuonomi.

1. A species of large scorpion (unidentified (animal, plant)). 2. A character in mythology, representing an excellent archer, good hunter and good warrior. Uhutima reached the Moon with his arrow at the moment it was about to escape behind the clouds. The blood of the Moon spread over the earth giving birth to the warriors.. ayamawe.

on the slope of that mountain, there where they hang from the trees, I will cut those lianas. fei pariki re uprayaﬁ, fei thoo thoku re tuyahi, ya thoku ta pafetipra.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will say that for sure (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

located in front of, and at a certain distance (variable), from the place of the utterance. -yahu.

to get stuck in the mud (perfective). kawehou kukei.

to sprout vigorously (a plant). tiriri.

they will eat meat (lit. wamaki yaropi wãri krothakrothamope.

some hekura hunters joined the son of Õmawe (who I possess as hekura, in my chest) and that is why I am still a good hunter. omawe pe ihirupi iha shama niyatimi a ha ithooproni, ya the pe yaropi niyãi nosiye.

meat, animal flesh. yaropi.

they are always pointing their guns at us: let them shoot then, it doesn't matter. kopeta a shiro hore puhuraihe ha, niyaai poohe.

it doesn. niyaai.

my pet animal attacked the fierce beast. thãriye a waitheri re shurukuapiyei.

my pet animal, my companion animal. thãriye.

the forest is cleared (without bushes, without undergrowth). the urihi noshi takakawe.

to be partially cleared or bare (ground). takakaa.

I'm going to bathe. ya yãrimou.

to bathe, to wash oneself. yãri-.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ya ishorayoma.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ishorayoma.

son-in-law, hurry up, when the sun is still low, the bees become visible. shoape a ta haiaprarou, e naha the kuo tehe pei re naki wawetoai.

to clear a dense area, to cut vegetation to clear an area. wawetoamai.

to move limping or hobbling. kayeheaprarou.

to cut, tear a strip (in a fabric, for example); to separate, choose; to flatten, make flat. makokoai.

The old woman sang the song of anger. suwe patani the ã wãyoã thapema.

1. anger, wrath 2. to be angry 3. to be in mourning. wãyo.

to have oneself tonsured by someone else. hopramou.

Acne started appearing on my face. shoko ya mi pe shohepi moãi.

to appear. shoke.

to fan a fire. koa wake hora.

Shapo konayoma (a female spirit) sat near me farting. shapo konayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, a shiã keyeheroma (cha.

sat. sentó.

you can see that they have not flowered. fei si ma re prokore.

have flowered. prokore.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

to stretch out (a line of people walking through the forest), to fell several trees on the same side in order to make a larger tree fall on them, to be elevated above. yashok.

the people of the cunaguaros are accustomed to crouch at the foot of the ãtãri bushes. ãtãri ke hipe koro hami yaori pe yererou re hearakiri ye.

to crouch, to squat against the ground. fyerere.

did they go there then, hungry, looking for food. kiha pe wãri oﬁri taeo mi fua pashirayou ma ta kuhawe.

to go there, hungry, looking for food. pashirayou.

it was because we did not really pursue you that you are still alive. pe nosi wãri teprai katitio ha maoni wa hore wãri temi.

to be always willing to accompany in the forest those who go in search of food. nosi tepou.

we orient ourselves and return to follow the path. yamaki re kateheprouwei, yama yo nosi re tea koreiwei.

to pursue, harass, corner; to be always willing to accompany in the forest those who go in search of food; to follow a trail, path. tepou.

the doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to give many injections to someone during a medical treatment (neologism); to shoot many times at a target when practicing with a bow (jokingly). tereshãprai.

to blow. huumi.

they put chili peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

they put chili peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. shoarareiwehei.

this one who lives like a 'White' person (ceremonial dialogue). napepe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

this one who lives like a . napepe.

go kill it (by shooting arrows). a ta niyapraharu.

go hunt váquiros there. ware ke ki ta niyapraharu.

to go and do something (e.g. hunt, kill). niyapraharu.

to fish with a fishing line. fyuri kããi.

to fish with a fishing line. kããi.

ancestor. paoimani.

to be located in an irregular manner. parereai.

they killed my male relative, they made him disappear (speech from upriver). ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

man (lit.: a bamboo arrowhead fell). Euphemism used to announce the death of a man.. hena*.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and this sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

to distribute it entirely in many pieces, to distribute it completely. ayakosiamai.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. turekeprou.

encima de la roca yacía una tragavenado. pei ke maki heaka hami hokoto keki re waririonowei.

tragavenado (type of snake). waririonowei.

if you refuse to do it, I will throw dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to throw dirt (sand, mud) once on a person, to punish a child in that way. pahumai.

they (the two) renounced their plan just like that. ke kipi kuyea ha paririni.

to renounce, to change one. kuyerayou.

you (pl. wamaki motai totihiope.

when you (pl. yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope.

to get tired, to become fatigued. motai.

to separate the edges of something (by burning it from the inside). hauhuprai.

flower. rioko.

object that has been partially crushed with the incisors. washishirayou.

he wants to get guns to kill me. homomami ke ki ha nakani, ihi ke kini ware niya re prapope.

gun. homomami.

she broke a thorn immediately with her fingers. misiki a kea ha shoareni.

tomorrow morning I will go to gather corn (by tearing off the ears with my hand). yono ya moku keai henaope.

to break, split, or tear off with the hand. shoareni.

became terrifying. no kirihiprou.

do your parents really live near here. haahe pe hiraa ahetea yairani.

your mother. haahe.

edible fruit of the potohi mohi tree. potohi.

to have power (hallucinogenic, tobacco, magic substance, curare, etc.). oomo.

little boy, young male relative (son, brother, parallel cousin). mokawe.

los chamanes que vivieron (otrora, en diferentes sitios). yãnomãmi the ki wãri hekura re periprai.

chamanes que vivieron (otrora, en diferentes sitios). periprawe.

he never comes. a huu taomi.

never. iyataaruni.

I will not go to visit you anymore (lit. pe kurathapi si wai mii mai ke the.

banana/plantain. kurathapi.

go get water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

I scoop out the banana compote that is in the pot with a gourd. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

to receive something that has been extracted using a utensil (gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikepei.

fruit of the wãkãri ãsihi tree. wãkãri ãsi.

fruit of the wãkãri ãsihi tree. wãkãri.

it is there where they intend to go for a long hunting trip. kiha pe pe niya heniyomou kuprei.

to go for a long hunting trip. heniyomou.

the child is born. kurara akahi.

to be born. akahi.

cannibal. ferãmi.

with those bamboos inclined I will make arrow points and inflict wounds. pe ihirupi a suhaaiyepe ka ha tharini (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to finish, to complete; to take all, to eat all. haikiai.

do not get up from your hammocks, do not go out. pe upraatihe, pe horeotihe.

do not get up, do not go out. horeotihe.

null. yokoshi.

there, on the other side (of the river) another mountain stands upright. kiha ai ke a pata hehu upraa re pekatuowei.

to stand upright, to be erect. pekatuowei.

in his house I hung my hammock in an oblique direction towards the central plaza of the dwelling (from the lower to the higher part of the dwelling's roof). kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

hang one. hehãpramou.

Brother, they twisted/wrenched my arms. apawe yare poko re ãihiprariherihe ye.

to twist/wring many objects partially. ãihiãkei.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

he gets angry for no reason. a hushuo si ihehewe.

it seems. ihehewe.

I will make many scratches on you. pe iprushimararei.

to scratch or make a scratch on someone. iprushimarei.

when you are thirsty, you roll a funnel-shaped leaf and thus collect the water from the thread of water that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

funnel-shaped leaf (for putting something inside). oshokoreãkei.

to become brighter, to clear up (the sky, the clarity of the day). hirahaai.

although they (two) went down, he killed them both anyway. kama ke kipi ithou ma kupe ha ke kipi shea he yatirema.

he killed them both. yatirema.

to have the shoulders, neck and lower jaw painted uniformly in ocher or black. rukekewe.

to make an object thicker in all its dimensions. supramararei.

pei. koshiki.

the hekura dragged the korihiotomi trees and in some places these were left leaning. hekura peni korihiotomi nahi pe pata pakikamahe, nahi pe yotehepramoma.

during clearing, to cut several trees on the same side so that they fall with the fall of a larger tree. pakiamai.

koapi vines. koapi ãshithoku.

vines or climbing plants. ãshithoku.

that will not break. the hetii mai ke the.

the ground cracked right where the ugly man was standing. wãritiwe the wãri re roowei ha a mashitha hetia re he wetirayouwei (mit.

to split or crack in multiple places. hetitaai.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni.

The hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. Shapokonayoma.

to occur momentarily. hishikitou.

when I reached the summit (feeling dizzy) I wondered what I was going to do. kihami ya re heakaai totihio kuhe tehe, weti naha wa ta thawe ya puhi kutaroma.

to rise above, to elevate to the sky. fheaka.

Kãrãnãri will make you fall. kãrãnãrini wa kemarei.

supernatural being of the yai the class; kicks those who climb trees and makes them fall. kãrãnãri.

there where the ãri ãhi tree rises, I will establish my plantations, in that place I will live. ãri ãhiki re uprayahi, ya ãhiki ka thai ha kuparuni, ya motoreo ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

1. To describe a circle while advancing. 2. To be, to live (in a certain place), to inhabit (gracefully, in a ceremonial dialogue). motoreo.

to be in shreds, to be too cooked (fish meat). kohihipi.

catfish. tootoowe.

I do not stop telling the truth. ya wã katititao ma re kui.

to tell the truth, to say what one thinks. katititai.

to decide to descend abruptly from a hammock (after having stayed in it for a long time). wahetou.

to move, to shake (when poorly tied). wahewahemou (habla del sur del Orinoco).

to descend abruptly. waheai.

to make a sound with something. imihena kreo.

to make a sound. imihena.

I will cause the metamorphosis of your head. pe he shi wãrihipramai (mit.

to cause a transformation, a metamorphosis; to generate a change of nature. shi wãrihipramai.

dile, por favor, que me regale una (escopeta). a no kopetapi re taope.

escopeta (rifle). taope.

I will hunt, we (you and I) will eat game (lit. yaro ke ya niyãprai pehe a wape.

to shoot an arrow at a target, to kill with a projectile, to kill with an arrow or gunshot. niyãprai.

a flame that extinguishes and reignites repeatedly. aketou.

protruding navel (offensive). fyimotha poyoyowe.

to protrude, to overhang, to jut out. poyoyowe.

I have thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

I have made it thinner. ishinapiprarema.

to be filled up to the brim. iyekea.

an object that can be given a medium or rather large size. prowehamou.

they kicked the excrement. kohoromi shipe kayoamahe.

they kicked. kayoamahe.

to stick out the tongue. waeo.

to be somewhat clear (vegetation), to be somewhat translucent. fwararaha.

to be happy. moheoami.

they put chili peppers to smoke roughly over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke (incompletely). wehero.

those arrowheads made with shaishairami bamboo, which are dangerous: surely your quiver is still full of those. mihi shaishairami pe siki wayu totihiwe ta thare, the ki kaopou kore ke the.

to make enter by force, to forcefully introduce an object into a container that is already full. kaoai.

he who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and without waiting deflowered her. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei (mit.

to have the leg swelling. fmatha shekekeai, inc.

leg, hind leg. waiwei.

to be angry. kuhãima.

the spirit omawe koheriwe took possession of my pei no uhutipi and masticates (devours) it. omawe koheriweni ware a no uhutipi ha ipirekirini, ware a no wãi uhuti ta wãshikiãkirire.

it masticates (it devours). wãshikiãkirire.

a mythological figure who transformed into the Moon Spirit and whose spilled blood gave rise to warfare among humans. Periporiwe.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it above everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

to rise above, become bigger than. morokou.

to strip off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pahathokei.

to share the food of others. niri.

he just penetrated into the dense vegetation. rutheruthe a ha a si poikuhe the huu tao re mai.

to penetrate into dense vegetation. poikuhe.

as they had exhausted the firewood for heating, they quickly climbed up the posts that support the communal shelter roof. koã ãsho pe mi ha watherini rope pe tuoproma, totahima pe hami.

to exhaust, to consume entirely. watherini.

the crested curassow's crest is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to be bristled (feathers or fur of an animal). mãririã.

to split, crack, break at the edge due to a blow (spherical object). tihathoai.

if only I could bathe. ya the ha yarimoruni.

to bathe. yarimoruni.

te aseguro que en todas las casas adonde los "Blancos" no han venido a inyectar, los Yãnomãmi se han muerto. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to begin to inject, to start injecting. hiweheprai.

he has added the chácharo over his side. ka komi shoawe.

he added the chácharo over his side. yetekema.

The devil's whisper is barely audible. decilla del demonio omãyãri apenas se escucha.

barely audible. omãyãri.

they have stolen my knife. siparaye si a thomiremahe.

they have stolen. thomiremahe.

young. oshetiwe.

to incline the head to receive a blow from an adversary. mi teio.

to lower, to incline the head. teiai.

excrement. orãmi*.

both are tall and appear (to the sight of others). ke kipi yareheo ha yaioni, the kipi wawetou ha yaironi.

to grow tall, to become tall. yarehe.

we launched a cry and they did the same. yamaki rariprariyoma, kama pe ã mi wãri hetuwe.

the enemy warriors launched a cry. wayu pe rariprariyoma.

they launched a collective cry. rariprariyoma.

to wedge, jam or hold an object firmly between two others. wãki.

he placed it on the ground, where the cassava dough was drying. nashi hipe re makepe ha a prakema.

to place, to put down. prakema.

to be very little greasy. ftapihihi.

Move in a line (and silently), like the chachaos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to align oneself, to line up. shaninikei.

hammock, let the visitors eat in the hammock. chinchorro, deja que los visitantes coman sohei.

hammock. sohei.

to have painted several motifs composed of crossed lines, to have decorated completely with crossed lines. yãrihirei.

to paint/draw transverse lines on multiple objects. tipruturarei.

to have an empty stomach. koehewe.

high. alta.

dense and thick (locally). shikorãyou.

to bend strongly, to fold to the breaking point (extreme of an object); to arch, to bend strongly under the weight of a load. pehuprou.

only some were able to get out of the water quickly. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

1. to get out of a canoe, to set foot on land, to get out of the water; 2. to carry several objects from a canoe or water to land. washiri.

to become less and less visible in the darkness. waroshoai.

to shout in a certain way: . hoohoomo.

they were mourning (crying for a dead person). the pe wãyoãmoma.

to be angry, to mourn. wãyoãmou.

he went to look for worms in a place where rocks rise up. maa ke mape hothopramope hami kohoromi e shipe torarema.

a place where rocks rise up. hothopramope.

to make vegetation move while passing through. prayokorei.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami (carried by the current) were passing one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma (mit.

to be partially filled or emptied (terminative aspect). hayaroprou.

to have a runny nose, to have a cold. fishihipiai.

palm. Astrocaryum.

to soften, to crumble, to collapse, to bend, to sway, to lean. krããhã.

woman who has become sterile due to shapo. shapopirayou.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakamai.

the leaves are covered with dew. y ã ã pe hena hemaãhupi.

dew. hemaãhu.

to dry (something). prake.

they proliferated (we realized afterwards). pe the pe pararayou no kureshi.

proliferated, spread, intensified (pain). pararayou.

to have oneself painted (with lines crossing the face). hu hahetimou.

to have oneself painted with lines crossing the face obliquely and intersecting on the nose. hahetimou.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

they will find you if they look for you. hoyããyoruimi.

they abandoned the path to hunt paujíes and get feathers for arrow plumes. pe rãmi paokei, paruri imisi pe kãi niya ha niyaheni.

to abandon the path, to walk off the path. paokei.

did they not hurt my son-in-law (lit. wãriãprahihahei.

did they not hurt my son-in-law (lit.: did they not damage my house). wãriãprahihahei.

go to lie down over there in front. a ta periikuhuru.

go to lie down over there in front or upriver. periikuhuru.

Zool. Zool. , giant otter; Pteronura brasiliensis (Mustelidae). , nutria gigante; Pteronura brasiliensis (Mustelidae).

giant otter. hetehiã.

se dieron cuenta de que Cucarachero no se divertía. osheanariwe a iriamou mrai a re tapareiwehei.

cucarachero (a type of bird). osheanariwe.

to roll up a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokore.

the rocky wall of Mount Yaapiwe is high. yaapiwe ki pata re tirerakiri ye (cha.

to be high, tall, elevated. hotaka.

to row at the front of a canoe. orapou.

he wants to kill me. hini yare niya prapoma.

to beat. aporrear.

to those paujíes with red crests perched there, they want to skin their crests. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

crest and neck skin of a bird (paují). mãru.

les voy a romper de verdad el omóplato a con el talón de un hacha. hãyokomani pemaki pootopi wãri yahekiprai ha totihironi (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

shoulder blade. poroapi.

to emerge, come out. ureai.

those big-mouthed fish that move, I will go fishing for them and give them to the Waika to eat. hei nape mãrohã ki re yaraape, ya ha yokeprarini, waika riha ya e wamai ta yaio.

shake the tail (of fish that move). yokeprarini.

hay racimos de plátanos en el conuco. pe shi toa re kuonowei peni oreyetu pe yarorowe ha tararini.

racimos de plátanos o cambures. oreyetu.

mientras ustedes se comen los intestinos de la danta, yo me comeré el hígado de la tortuga (lit. shama ke wama shipe wai tehe, totoriye ke ya ãmoku wape.

tortuga. totoriye.

her pregnancy was very visible, her husband was going to be stunned when he arrived. suwe ke e maka tiyeria ha, pe heãropi ke e ãmoku keprohorope.

to be in an advanced state of pregnancy (humorous). fmaka.

you will not be able to break my head (with your teeth). yare he pehi rukemai mai ke the jar.

to go under; to pass under. pehitheaai.

to be happy. shoeshoe.

we were in the fogón (fireplace) of Thão. thão.

a proper noun or place name. Thão.

to have big ears (insulting). hiyãhãwe.

to be carrying a load by supporting it on the shoulders with a strap. pakatamapou.

when she walked at a certain distance from the others, a jaguar appeared. a huu prihãtou hoo tehe, ira ke a petariyoma.

to walk at a certain distance from others. ihãtou.

Cook the cassava and give it to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to make someone eat, to give food to someone. iyamai.

aunque allá el enemigo sea aterrorizante, yo me propongo atacarlo (lit. kihi kitanari a pata re fuopiyei, a no ma kiriai tehe, a nape niya rii keo totihiawe.

puma. fuopiyei.

they wrapped their excrements in leaves and threw them (over the roof). the pe hãro sheyemahe.

they wrapped. sheyemahe.

vomit repeatedly. wekekai.

to be completely cracked or split open. thepahaprou.

he went quickly to hide behind the trees and immediately called the human beings. pei ke yo ha yetu ke the pata ha wariripraikiyoni, yãnomãmi the nakai shoaoma.

to go towards (a location). fikiyo.

rããmo. eai.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

to shoot a small wooden arrow with a fire-hardened tip (usually done by children or to kill small fish). tiheherei.

to divide, separate, move away from others temporarily to live apart, definitively separate from the community to go live elsewhere. shekereai.

to weaken or cause to die. sheprou.

to denounce. hayu.

it is full to the brim. he rahoprawe.

to be full to the brim. rahoprawe.

to release a person who has been restrained to prevent them from committing acts of violence, once they have calmed down. huhuraprarei.

their corpses were strewn on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

scattered, strewn (perfective, plural object). tikukurariyo.

to boast about one. himomarei.

to start tying knots. moshokoreprai.

they put the tapir liver to cook. shama ãmo pe re tupeiwehei.

to have something cooking, to keep something cooking. tupou.

tree; Inga sp. (Leg., Mimosaceae). akasihiki.

her son-in-law was removing a thorn (from his foot). pe hekamapi misiki e washama.

to remove a thorn or spine using a pointed object. washama.

to become disheveled (hair). porukai.

with circular movements (such as peeling an apple with a knife). shokekerarei.

that day like today, it never ended. ei the ki haru re kui, the ki haru mranomi.

to disappear, to cease to exist, to be exhausted. mranomi.

extend, stretch out a finger. fi m ihena kashesheai.

bend a finger. imihena shãkoãi.

fingers of a hand. fimihenaki.

there are animals in the forest (or: animals live in the forest). urihi hami yaro pe huu.

to moisten the fingers with saliva (generally to catch a small object that is stuck) and also it can be The word 'huu' in Yanomami means 'to go'. fimiki kahupitou.

to be, to live, to exist. huu.

to be placed on top of each other. yareho.

pónganse rápidamente a correr (cada uno por su lado). pe ta rereo shoaomopotu.

to disperse rapidly. -omopotayo-.

I will tie the ends of the leaves of the package to be cooked. ya the hãro he ãtetepei.

to tie, to bind, to fasten. amarro.

Siroromi immediately set about skinning the man. siroromini yãnomãmi the si yoprai shoarayoma.

to separate (skin), to peel off, to strip off bark. tiproko.

to make rebound, to make bounce. mãiãmai.

to cry for a moment. ikitou.

your friend. no rimihe.

his/her friend. pe no rimipi.

friend, person with whom one has a relationship of exchange. rimihe.

they prepared the yopo, and inhaled it. epena a ha tikikiheni, a koamahe.

yopo (hallucinogenic snuff). epena.

to miss someone for a moment, to feel sad for a moment. iyotou.

to become scarce, to become less abundant. wãisikiripiai.

the man kept pressing Siroromi vigorously. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to continue pressing hard. ãkikipou.

to be inundated. hashiriprou.

to cause to submerge completely. paotamakei.

to laugh until you can. kohipiprou.

I won't separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I'm going downriver to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

make rattling noises (of metal objects colliding, especially pots being carried; poles being dragged along the ground). teeteemo.

to untie, unbind (multiple objects). kusherarei.

(myth): Woman-Flat-Belly was completely flat. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

to level, flatten. resisiai.

a curved line that joins one corner of the lips to the other, passing through the cheeks and forehead; to have such a line painted on the face. hiporoshikei.

he got up and approached a masi vine, pulling it. a ha uprataruni, masi a ikokorema.

to approach, to get close. ikokorema.

the avocado tree flowered for the first time. ãhãi ke hi hapamou.

that which occurs for the first time and will continue occurring regularly; a tree that bears fruit for the first time. fhapamou.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to keep, conserve something at a distance from the dwelling. hewemapou.

to give desire for making love. peshimai.

to get dirty, to stain. shamiãi.

the vulture glides. watupa a reraai.

to glide, to soar. reraai.

to repeat what was heard (often distorting it in a biased way) from one place to another. wãnotaai.

"This is a banana", it is said. "ya ta hokeri", pareami.

it is said. pareami.

Yoreriyoma (= Woman-mushroom) mourned her son and cried. yoreriyoma pe ihirupi a nomiã poma.

Who are you crying for. weti ke wa the nomiã pou.

to mourn, to cry for. nomiã.

siki. kitapito.

Why did she cry out in pain. anuna rii rããmou kuhe.

to groan, to cry out in pain. rããmou.

to soften something, to make something soft locally. epeheamai.

the cotton hammocks get impregnated with the strong smell of the brew that the hekura use to kill. watota ke u nakini yii ke ki ni watota re ke ki rukerayoma (cha.

to impregnate with a strong smell, to give off a strong smell. rukerayoma.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to that by which they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a wild beast that was pursuing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to leave behind in a short time a certain place by walking fast. toretakei.

(habla de río arriba. the wamou ure- uruﬁ.

water, liquid. ure-.

seem, appear. mimou.

to pass and return. weyoyoweyoyomou.

she passed the tobacco through the ashes carelessly, kneaded the quid and threw it at him. pee nahe yetu re the ha shãishãikini, the ha humiprarini, e the sheyekema.

she passed the tobacco through the ashes carelessly. shãishãikini.

press your fingers together. imiki ta wikok o i k u.

to have the fingers pressed together. wikok.

to dry (something). prama.

we passed in front of the abandoned camp's shelters. yamaki ha ukuukuikuni, payepayekepokirioma, ai e nahi wãri (habla del sur del Orinoco.

refugios. parokini.

to sharpen a knife. nana ishuimi nouku.

knife. ishuimi.

to be pot-bellied (insulting in the presence of the person). shipretewe.

to lie down on the ground for a while. praprao.

a little child crying in the absence of its parents; to cry for a dead person. pokomou.

to cry, to weep, to lament. wãno.

His skin is still stuck on (downriver). e siki rukea shoaa kurakiri.

to be situated at a distance downriver. rakiri.

to scratch oneself repeatedly. tikeketaai.

it just passed behind Mount Teriope. teriope ke ki hami a ãyorii kuhe (mit.

to go behind, to pass behind. ãyorii.

to remain hidden for a long time. hithetaai.

Scrape it quickly with the machete. siparani wa the ha horerehorereprarini.

to scrape, rub, or clean using the edge of something (like a knife or machete blade); to clean or scrape something with a split vine held between the hands. shorere.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than; to place closer to a certain limit. haweamai.

1. To place a recipient. tirere.

he started by scratching his leg. pei matha ha the hapa shoreretarema.

he started scratching his leg. shoreretarema.

kinship term, vocative, refers to the daughter of the sister (possible future wife of a son). shete.

spotted or speckled with black (generally a dog). pãrishãpi.

the meat is tender. yaro a epehewe.

the bow is too flexible. hãto nahi a epehewe.

to be soft, tender, flexible. moroshi*.

I am convinced that there is really no rahara monster. rahara ke ki no wãri kuopimi ma re totihii.

not exist, not be (in a certain place). kuopim.

one does not deny anything to a father-in-law. pe shii the pe iha the pe shi imamou taomi.

to tell someone not to give something. imamomai.

to be angry. toreshesheãmi.

this is going to come loose. the prohoai.

to be loose, slack. prohoprou.

to hang cotton fibers to dry. shinari uku rukekai.

to hang cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry them. rukekai.

to be thin. shipei.

Refers to the males of certain bird species of the genus Pipra sp.. patautherimi.

to throw over [he paromakei, perfective]. he paromai : lanzar por encima de [he paromakei, perf.

lanzar por encima de. paro.

brother-in-law, they will be incapable of enduring that. s h ori pe the pe puhi rohothomapou taomi.

they will be incapable of enduring/resisting. rohothomapou.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

they threw it very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. kukekiriowehei.

they will offer him sweet potatoes. huko mo e pe hipemahe.

he went there to distribute pijiguaos. kihami rasha ke pe hipema.

to offer, to give. hipema.

wing bones of a bird. hãrãrãmãpi.

the Shapo Woman (supernatural being) came to sit near me farting: "don't dirty my nose", I told her. shapo konayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, shiã keyeheroma: "yare hiyokaki shamiãmai tikootihe", ya kutariyoma (cha.

to make dirty, to stain. shamimai.

to peel the grains of yopo. hiprushi.

to snort (perfective of inchoative); to snort (perfective of durative). rekukurei.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. fniya hupamou maorewe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. maore.

He cut a short stick that he tied to the end of another, making it arrive (at the top of the tree). horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tiketamapareheroma.

to make (something) arrive (at a place). tiketamapareheroma.

to scrape off (surface). hikekeai.

to scrape off the surface. hikeke-.

as Amoãyoma wants to be under it, the leaves of the tree of songs beautify it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro, pei ke hena noshi re hariape ye.

female spirit associated with the ãmoã tree. ãmoãyoma.

he is angry. kothãrãwe katosihi.

to be angry. kothãrãwe.

he did not go. a hunomi.

he was not angry. a hushuonomi.

negation of the declarative past. -nomi.

to be locally damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekeheã.

to smooth locally, to smooth in one place and not another. frakahakei.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

peeled yopo grains; scratches; embryos extracted from cotyledons; touched with the glande (considered repugnant). iprusha.

the fruits of the moriche turn slightly yellowish when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

have taken that color (fruit eteweshi). okoroshirayou.

to have a swollen belly; to be full (of food). makasi yahetewe.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

to be covered with moss. kapurashipiai.

they spend time making love. a shiro wamotii.

to be always eating, to eat for a long time. watii.

eran susurros (they were whispers). mahanini the ã kuoma.

whisper, barely audible. mahanini.

fishing line, fishing thread. uheya ãsitha.

hook. uheya.

Iewe brought cassava bread (to offer upon arrival). ieweni nashi hiki re perakeherayouwei.

to bring/carry (something) from a distant place to the place of the speaker. perakeherayouwei.

I am hungry. wã koãma.

to be hungry. koãma.

my eyes turned red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

to redden; to ripen. wakei.

taxonomic classifier. hiyomãri.

to fold the legs of a dead bird by turning them so that the claws hook behind the thighs (to carry it on the back). yorekea.

warrior. guerreros.

my elder brother has let the disease demons escape many times (during shamanic cures), they have already rejected us (him and me). ãimawe no wãri ke ki huhehea waikirayonowe, peheki yashuprai waikirayou ke a kuhe (cha.

I will sit next to my elder brother. ãiwe a wãri iha kamiye ya roo aheteo.

elder brother, paternal cousin, father or grandfather, father. ãi.

¡qué mentirosos son. kurahe re the pe wai horeheta.

expresses astonishment. horeheta.

the Yãnomãmi will never stop blowing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

to dedicate oneself entirely, to commit malevolent acts. onono.

a large scorpion species (unidentified animal or plant); a mythological character representing an excellent archer, good hunter and good warrior who shot the Moon with his arrow as it was about to escape behind the clouds, its blood spreading over the earth giving birth to warriors. suhi-rina.

to fill a container up to the brim (durative, plural object). rahomai.

they constructed the bridge. the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

to place horizontally (long objects), to draw a horizontal line. rereakei.

to be a habitual liar (archaic, rare). fhore kashiwe.

to be a habitual liar. kashiwe.

speak from upriver. shãkãshãkã thoku.

speak from upriver. shãkãshãkã.

it is nothing other than a pelt of a fox, however its head (upper extremity) has a nice groove. yarushe pei si ma kui wa si he pata yakatowe ta toprapariyohani.

it is nothing other than a pelt of a fox, however its head (upper extremity) has a nice groove. toprapariyohani.

como no habían renunciado a hacerlo, ellos se pusieron a gemir uno tras otro. ha maoheni pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to run/move from one place to another. tiraaprarai.

to bring heavy or bulky objects close to the place where they will be used. ahetepramarei.

evil people associated with this clay. kroakroari.

to become rigid for a moment under the effect of an effort. hiraratou.

the doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to give many injections to someone during a medical treatment (neologism); to shoot many times at a target when practicing with a bow (jokingly). tereshãprai.

he entered the rabipelado's den and came out immediately. opo pekapi ha a ha rukerini, a he hapramai koã re shoarayouwei.

1. To come out immediately after having entered. 2. To make the end of something come out, often by piercing. 3. To lead into, to arrive at, to enter (a path that ends in another path, a stream of water that flows into another). he hapramai.

when they make the novices inhale pore henaki (at the time of their initiation), they become capable of regurgitating the plant during a shamanic session. pore henakini yãnowãmi wa the he horai kukema, pe henaki pehi thao.

magical substance. yãnowãmi.

to be hungry. mohehã.

to cut, to break off. pahetiai.

they piled up banana shoots on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha kuratha si pe hirapraai yaiomahe (mit.

they piled up firewood at the entrance of the burrow. pei pekapi kasi ha koã ãsho hirapraai re kukeiwehei (mit.

to pile up, to group together, to gather. hirapraai.

initiate someone into shamanism. thamakei.

The váquiro bird took a shortcut going directly through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

the two of them went directly towards (an enemy, prey animal, etc. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to take a shortcut through the forest. tiherikei.

Õmawe advanced crouched so as not to be seen and quickly found himself close (to the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei.

to sneak, move quickly crouched to approach an animal or enemy. tereteremou.

to break due to an effect. namo yutuu.

to break, to stumble, to be expelled. yutuu.

to offer food (to many people in succession). pemokei.

to take refuge from the rain. wehenas.

to have bulging eyes (offensive in the presence of the person). yeheye.

in all the points of the trees. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to rub against, to clean, to wipe, to erase by rubbing with the hand or a pointed object; to dirty or stain an object by rubbing or applying another. hãhiãi.

to speak in a low voice for a moment, to speak in a low voice (after having spoken normally). wahatotou.

it wears out quickly. i waitou.

to wear out quickly. waitou.

to be crumbled, crumbled state. hashishia.

the váquiros put themselves to advance very quickly and Pájaro váquiro was advancing along with them. ware ke ki ropaaprarou shoaoheri, aheanariwe a wãri rerea poaaprarou ha kuparuni.

they put themselves to advance very quickly. ropaaprarou.

game animals. nini waiamai.

prey. waiamai.

to keep mixed objects, to keep a remaining mixture of hallucinogens, to wear feather adornments from different birds. koyokopou.

I knock down the lechosa fruit with a stick. shamakoro ya hirikai.

1. To knock down with a long stick, to harvest fruit by knocking it down with a stick. 2. To scratch, to scrape with the tip or edge of an instrument, making a downward motion. hirikiai.

wild yam (Dioscoreaceae), with dark gray pulp. mamohiyomi.

(speaks of upriver). shoferemapi.

hold him down on the ground, I'm going to break his kidneys with a heel strike. mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo ya mi wãri ta kahekipra ke.

to break someone. kahekiprai.

they are the ones who make me advance ahead as an explorer (when they go to war). re the peni yare nosi pariapramai totihiowei.

to advance ahead as an explorer. pariprarai.

when my house is cold. yãno si ahio tehe.

house. ahio.

the load hanging from his back was stretched downwards. fthe yehio yatukuwe.

to be stretched downwards. yatukuwe.

he/she/it enclosed it between his/her/its feet. wareiwei.

what is cooking in the pot. ¿qué está cocinando en la olla.

how many are there. weti naha the kua.

what smell do you have. weti naha ke wa ni kuaai.

what?. ¿qué?.

they live in the forest. pe hiraaharayoa.

to live, to dwell. uruhi.

to fit poorly, to insert imperfectly, to close badly. hietiai.

to separate into several groups when walking through the forest, to separate so that each one lives on their own. sherereprou.

he deposited the termite nest on the ground and broke it open with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

to open by tearing, to tear the wrapping of a package with the fingers; to break with the hand (perfective form, sense 1: to do this in order to offer). hureshekei.

he carried two plucked paujíes one against the other, he gave them to the woman. paruri e kipi roshi ha parekereni, suwe ke iha e kipi hipekema.

to remove the outer layer (of multiple objects). roshimai.

small hole left by a parasite in the skin after being extracted. wanoka.

to have short legs (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). yerere.

tela zurcida. tiyeno.

to place in the center, in the middle. ãmoãkei.

to crush or flatten something by hitting it with the palm of the hand, to crush an insect in this way. pai.

come here to fan the fire. koa wake ta yareyo.

I will kill the cachicamo by putting smoke in its den. opo ya yareprai.

when they find a giant cachicamo, they will suffocate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

to fan the fire. yareyo.

fill up to the brim. iyekeamai.

to make a hole. wayapotoremi.

do not sleep. pe miotihe.

I told them not to sleep. ya kutariyoma.

do not sleep. miotihe.

his two sons, who were shamans, stayed behind to elevate the shelters a little (to prevent them from being submerged). pe ihirupi e kipi re hekuraonowei, e kipi hãtopi nahi tireheaprarou heoma.

to rise a little, to elevate a little, to place a little high. tirehe.

he turned his back on her, Rabipelado threw the malefic substance at her. kuu kãi hayua kokeherouwei (mit.

he gave her the back, turned his back on her. kokeherouwei.

bamboo shaving. rahaka akaweshi.

Translation:. mayepi akaweshi.

shaving, chip. akaweshi.

to place oneself along an elongated object, to lean against an elongated object. hiriki.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (he has no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

we will not go on a visit (he and I). kamiye hamamou mai ke the.

to go on a visit to another community. hamamou.

yo y mi cuñado vamos a recoger frutos. mayepi yagra.

to gather fruits. yagra.

to burn a single place in the conuco (swidden). patikei.

mixed, bound. nikerewe.

am I not right. ya re pehetiwe.

to have reason, to be right. pehetiwe.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to break into small pieces, to fragment. nakashiai.

they hid (objects in the forest). momo pe thari re roamapinowei.

they hid (objects in the forest). roamapinowei.

to make faces. wãrihothomou.

to take a small amount. wãisipirei.

to amplify (noise, voice). nakepramai.

I have thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

I have made it thinner. ishinapiprarema.

I took the bow without arrows and walked leaning on it. hãto mãroko ya nahi re tereiwei, ya paihou kuaaherima.

to lean on, support oneself with a stick or bow while walking. paihou.

for whom and why are they having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriamoãi ta sihewe.

they are having fun. iriamoãi.

to sneeze. esikamorayou.

the child was extending the tobacco to him in vain. ihiruni pee nahe ma totopou tehe.

give me a machete. ipa namo ta totopa.

offer the other arrows. fei ai ki re kui e ki ta totoku.

to offer, to present (to give), to extend an object to someone. totooma.

to be very angry. pohopohomo.

1. to become dusty, to cover with dust 2. dusty 3. dust. hekrã.

I provoked the return of the hekura. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

I provoked the return. tatomarema.

to speak (southern Orinoco dialect). atahu (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to speak (southern Orinoco dialect). atahu.

to scratch the cavity that separates the toes of the foot by passing an object between them (a piece of wood, a cloth, etc.). kakekuai.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

the cat. ini.

to cling to a person with all one. huwehai.

Daughter, go to the shifting grounds, attract people so that you and your husband can gather pijiguaos for me. heãrohe sho rashaye ke ki ta yuapi: hija, valos terrenos movedizos, atrae a las personas hayan tú y tu marido a recoger pijiguaos para mí.

As they approached the sandy beach, the demon of the shifting grounds attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei (mit.

demonio maligno de la clase yai the asociado a oãsi, demonio de los terrenos movedizos. heãhãturiweni.

(el recipiente que contiene) mis semillas kashuhuri está recubierto. kashuhuriye ke pe he yohoa kure.

semilla roja y negra del árbol kashuhuri hi. uhuri.

if you move in this way, the humans will hear you and kill you. minaha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

thus, in this way, in this manner. minaha.

I will mix the aphrodisiac kumi with the bark of the mãrã tree and use it to seduce her. kumi ya rii fa feshiprarini, mãrã ya siﬁ fa feshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

bark. siﬁ.

she escaped, let her then find the right path (to return home). pe the hore tokurayoma, a shi ta kateheprou shoaro.

to repair the feathering of an arrow, to arrange, to order, to untangle, to disentangle. kateheai.

he obstructed the orifice of the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

obstructed, closed, blocked. kahukema.

wait a moment. no taprao.

wait a moment. taprao.

each will spread them out again and also it can be The word 'pe' in Yanomami means 'to be able'. pe the patherio koope ke.

to decapitate. he peprai: decapitar.

each. pe.

it is slightly shiny/greasy. the wãisipi mimou tapihiwe.

slightly greasy/oily. tapihiwe.

la mezcla de agua y miel está (demasiado) espesa. puu upe mi hute.

ser potente (alucinógeno). wayu mi hute.

to thicken (liquid); to become darker (dye); to ripen (fruit). mi hute.

in the place where we could not pass (due to an obstacle). pemaki shi ta wãrioprei ha.

the place where we could not pass (due to an obstacle). wãrioprei.

to make a funeral pyre. koa wake ka tha.

funeral pyre, bonfire on which the dead are cremated. koa wake ka.

(no translation provided). nakasiki warirorewe.

a young girl, a daughter, a younger sister, a parallel cousin, or any young girl to whom one wants to show affection. nakasi.

you (fem. nape shimiãprai.

to insist before someone to send them to do something. shimiãprai.

Oh. ipa ya waiamai heparoa ta kupowe.

state, duration. powe.

they hide (in the forest) their hammocks of bejuco. thoo thotho pe ropramaihe.

they hide (in the forest) their hammocks of bejuco. ropramaihe.

to be located at the front of a canoe to steer it. ora-pou.

to help. thãrimi.

to begin to push away, reject with the hands (repeatedly). hiruruprai.

bring the meat here, transporting it on the back. yaro a ta yehipoima.

bring the meat here, transporting it on the back. yehipoima.

to succeed someone in an activity, to substitute someone, to take over from someone. notiprou.

immediately, the otter started swimming under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the water surface, behind the clouds (celestial body). urur.

jo, let me descend (from your back). pusi, yare ta ithopramari.

to make descend, to let descend (someone whom one is carrying). ithopramari.

to make clear, limpid, translucent (durative, plural object). herushimai.

he went around the camp examining it (then he said): "but where could they have gone. yãno ke pe miã tiporea ha hititiapotuni: "weti hami wa the pe kurayoma ta thawe. ". ".

to go around in a circular form, to go around. tiporer.

the Yãnomãmi are not afraid to face arrows (ceremonial dialogue). yãnoãmi pe pe pufi no wãri shesensaripi perihiwe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to readily engage in violence, to go to war. puhipe tharehe.

I tie a knot around my forehead. ya he ãtet e p e i.

to tie a knot around the forehead. ãtetepei.

when he arrived at a medium height (of the tree). pe peshekutohorayou tehe.

upriver, or at a certain height. -vhv-rayo-.

to be completely folded. wãhiwe.

the rapasimi fish are full of spines. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

the woman was very beautiful and Rabipelado made love to her during the night. riyehewe heparohowe a suwe kuoma, kama ke iha nãroriwe a wamou he haruma.

full of spines, spiny. heparohowe.

edible fruit of the pasho ãhuhi shrub. ãhuhi.

the man had mixed/mingled into the dense group of winged termites. osheri ke pe yayomope hami yãnomãmi ke the re nikerepariyonowei.

he had mixed/mingled into the dense group. nikerepariyonowei.

the food of the hekura makes you lose strength. hekura re pe nini wa uhutuai totihia.

to become soft, to become weak, to lose strength. uhutitirayou.

to clean a place. yasiki.

to be muddy locally. kawehea.

to become sad when a loved one is absent. okimai.

tree. camaticaro.

I approached crouched, above me was a gallineta (bird). ya e ha terekeikuni, hãshimo pe pata yarehetao kuperei.

to be above, to be raised (an object). terekeikuni.

the young people, for their part, wove open-weave mapires. huya peni yorehi si tuyei ayaoma.

the young people. ayaoma.

to cut an animal into pieces. pasheshe.

the capuchin monkeys were moving towards us among the trees; they discovered us immediately. yawerewe ke ki imiimama yetu yamareki wãri ayaa ha tikoreni.

incestuous. yawerewe.

to dirty something locally. shamimakei.

the young people never stay still. huya the pe yãnikio ma re mai.

to calm down, to stop. yãnikiãi.

fried food. fhãrikã no.

fried food, ready to be consumed. fhãrikã.

to mix, to join with people from another community. nikerepramou.

Horonãmi who was lost found Cachicamo. horonãmi a mohoru ha kuparuni, moro a tararema (mit.

to get lost, to stray. mohoru.

Yoawe's penis sound and also it can be The word 'moroshi' in Yanomami means 'son'. yoawe moroshi heã.

soft, tender, flexible. moroshi.

he consumed all the bones (of his own incinerated corpse). oshohore ke ki hititiararema (mit.

they exhausted all the firewood. koã the ãsho pe hititiararemahe.

all, entire, complete. hititi.

later you will realize the consequences of your action. waiha wa no wai shihiroprarowe.

to put oneself in a situation that will have dire consequences. hiroprarou.

salted. mositiwe.

with spines. mohomi.

durative, plural acts. shishai.

dust. hekrãhekrã.

In the mythology of some upriver communities (speaks of upriver), Kuripowe is the master of tobacco, and responsible for its introduction among human beings.. Kuripowe.

they already have all the nose broken. ipa rafakapi totoorewe ke.

they have all the nose broken. rafakapi.

to become narrower, to close (a hole, opening, orifice). hookoãi.

slightly curved. wãhetãi.

to paint something red. momihãm.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied at different heights. mi wereheo.

to be directed towards the ground, to hang, to sink, to lean towards. were.

it is no doubt because of those constant itches that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

reason, cause, motive. siye.

an extensive region. aka praukuwe y aka hauhuwe.

vast, spacious, extending over a large area. hauhuwe.

to reflect on something, to look for a solution. imikiãi.

—Cuñado, ¿de verdad eres tú. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe. —¡Sí, de verdad soy yo. —awei ke, kamiye ke.

yes, indeed. awei.

1. to become fragile or brittle, 2. to be brittle. yeriri.

he has killed repeatedly. a wãri ishooprou re kupiyei.

to attack or kill repeatedly. ishoprou.

from the interior of a hole. taroprou.

the tembladors gave me several shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador fish. tifeki.

ant. shiãporokomi.

vacillating, unsure of himself, Pico de lacre transported the fire. yorekitiraweni e wake kãi heheheaprarou kupariyoma.

vacillating, unsure of oneself. yorekitiraweni.

to tie the legs of a hunted animal to the body (to carry it). ikokomai.

children, do not come to mix with us. pashikiprarotihe.

in the lobe of their ears they had inserted parrot tail feathers. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the shinaki huuararema.

tail (of a bird). shinaki.

to divide into two groups that follow divergent directions. pakaraota-.

she was going from one place to another and her laughter was always heard moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

stay still (or else, you'll see what happens) [antiphrase]. pe he ta reshipro.

to go from one place to another, not to stay still. reshipro.

Despite the lack of food, I grate a little manioc and thus manage to eat. nashi ya wai ha hirikikini ya kaihou shoatakei.

To manage to eat a little in a time of general scarcity. kaihorayou.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

to take borrowed, to borrow. mahiãi.

the Yanomami always put on a sullen expression (upriver speech). yãnoãmi pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

to put on a serious or hateful expression, to adopt an angry look. tikrohoamai.

to repair, to fix. toprai.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied one higher than the other. wereheo.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). mashaema.

to come from the bottom of a hole or den (noise). fwã hai pawewe.

to accumulate at the bottom of something, to form a deposit; to live at the bottom of a den (animal). paweprou.

supernatural evil beings immediately opened his chest. yai theni pariki pakekeprai nokarayoma (mit.

I responded immediately to their shots, I heard them groan. ya pe niyaprai nokarayoma, pe rããmorãy o m a.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to occur immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. pakekeprai.

to bruise in several places. wãokoprou.

to massage someone to relieve pain. huteterarei.

they shot numerous arrows at a fat tapir in a pond. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, wawewawe praope ha.

to shoot numerous bamboo-tipped arrows. shekiamou.

he told me to come. yare nakama.

they asked Scorpion to go (in a myth). suhirina a nakamahe: "kaheni the ta niyapraayo.

to call someone, to tell someone to come, to claim something from someone, to invite, to request, to demand. nakataai.

to walk doubled over (due to severe stomach pain). haotai.

they had their heads shaved out of fear of lice. noma pe no shiki kiri ha thaheni pe he marokoshimou.

they had their heads shaved. marokoshimou.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). pakatarimi.

we have fun. pemaki iriamou.

I look at you (plural). pemaki mii.

we (inclusive, subject). pemaki.

to have a convex mark (hollowed out, and caused by pressure) around the entire circumference (cylindrical or spherical object); to be carved, circularly lowered. exa.

1. to scrape with the teeth the soft pulp of a fruit (to eat it). 2. to scrape with the teeth.. wãhehe.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

completely. totihirayou.

furuncle. shããpi.

furuncle. shããpi.

colorless liquid that oozes from a wound. nionio.

(he/she/it) becomes many. yateheai.

to become many. yatehe.

Mirewakariwe grabbed him immediately under the water. mirewakariweni imiki kea shoapariyoma (mit.

to grab with an energetic gesture. imiki ke.

those who did not commit incest. the pe shi re katehei ke the pe.

1. Not to be tangled; not to be disoriented. 2. Not to commit incest. shi katehewe.

to take on a slightly thick/pasty consistency (like yogurt), either by thickening from a more fluid state or by becoming more fluid from a thicker state. thepehe.

The vine will not break, it is already solid (its bark is rough). hetii mai ke the, pe the thotho sikãã waikirayoma.

1. To develop a new bark after shedding the old one (tree). 2. Vegetation that grows back after clearing. sikosiãi.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

others were floating, stiff, on the water surface (myth). yaioma (mit.

to float, to wade, to walk through water. karoro.

over the edges (of a basket). he iyekekei.

over the edges (of a basket). iyekekei.

her older female relative, who is there, if only we could live in adjacent homes. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

older female relative. amipi.

make small fires. kai wãisipi wake wai ta thakihe.

make small fires. thakihe.

(speech from upriver). shãru.

to curl up, coil up. akreteprou.

to take shelter from the rain. wetirefugio.

the old man that I killed in the war (who had tied a monkey's tail around his head). fipa ya si re turekeaprai.

to tie a monkey. turekeai.

his younger brother spoke when the dawn was breaking. the mi wakaraai tehe pe oshe re e ã petariyoma.

to be slightly opened towards the exterior. wakararayou.

I descended the slope. ya mi weteherima.

descended the slope. weteherima.

skeleton of a dead spider monkey in the forest. fpasho.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically for a while. imiki yokoyokomu.

the people of tayari theri shot many arrows from far away. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikãihe.

shot many arrows. tishikãihe.

water bird, cotara caracolera; Aramides cajanea (Rallidae). koshekã.

those ripe bananas, give them to me so that I can try them. the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa.

dim red light of a flashlight with low batteries. ushi fsh wake.

the tender pulp of a fruit (for example, the pulp of the milky fruit that adheres to the shell). wãkekãi.

plegar el brazo (cuando uno estaba en otra posición). tishakotou.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (moving objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to find something by moving objects around. heaponi.

to heal, to cure. temioprou.

I stay (I don't go with the others). ya kuo heai.

while the others were away, they stayed in the house to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou ha heani (mit.

the children fight during the absence (of the adults). ihiru the pe sheyeo heai.

while Horonami remained in the house, his son went to where Titiri was lamenting. horonami yahi a kuo heai tehe, pe ihirupi titiri a re miã ikinowei hami a ukukema (mit.

to remain, to stay behind. fea.

way. ikotihe.

we stopped for a good while on the summit (of the mountain). hesika hami yamaki uprahataoma.

we stopped for a while. uprahataoma.

flaunt. mayoko.

(a type of leaf). pisha.

1. to twist, to twist a vine or bark to soften it; 2. a vine that has been softened in this way. yaprote.

I will scratch you a lot. pe iprushimararei.

to scratch, to claw. prushima.

to hide for a moment. hithetou.

the simitori (a wood-boring insect) has partially carved the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

to carve or shape partially around the circumference of a cylindrical or spherical object. eshehemakei.

to receive a narrow strip cut or broken off. makosipei.

when all the palm trees in one place have their clusters on the lower part of the trunk. ikrekewe.

they transported me in a hammock tied to a pole. yare hiki pou kuaamahe.

pole that two people hold at the ends. arana*mou.

quédate durmiendo, pues, mientras ellos hacen el amor con tu mujer. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo.

tú duermes mientras hacen el amor con tu mujer. wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe.

ya que ustedes tienen mujeres, acuéstense en los chinchorros y hagan el amor juntos. pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

to make love. amor.

the tortuga bit forcefully the throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

to suck, to aspirate. shoaaruni.

the woman's breasts were firm and erect, she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. suwe hãkãmiki ha sherereikuni, suwe ke a yokoapraroma.

she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. yokoapraroma.

to mount or be mounted on something in order to reach an object. hiyãhãhão.

to be crowded together (human beings). yayowe.

to be crowded together (human beings). yayowe.

(myth): Yãmonãmãriwe was beautiful, tall and dark-skinned. u ushishiãushuhuwe yarehewe totihitawe no kirii.

to become slightly dark green (tobacco); a stream of water that becomes turbid or dark green when a living being passes through it. ushishiãushuhuwe.

(he/she) is drying/toasting it very quickly. henaki ta shirishiripra.

to dry or toast something very quickly. shirishiripra-.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). warororayou.

to tap with the tip of an object, to knock on a door once. krookai.

to dry and harden a wet soil by spreading earth over it. yihitamai.

they asked him to accompany them when they were going to a momo fruit feast organized by the souls. no porepi ke peni momo ke a ha the pe shoaihe tehe, a nokamapomahe.

they asked him to accompany them. nokamapomahe.

I trace a line with onoto over my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to have painted a curved line from one ear to the other passing over the forehead. tiwarokei.

it was an ugly capuchin monkey's tail, with few hairs. wãritiwe ke the teshina wararawe e kuoma.

to become less dense, to clear up (vegetation); to stop being crammed, stuffed. warara.

to start making bamboo. hitotoprai.

habitually blows a cool breeze (in the morning, before dawn). fwahari a phouo tharei.

habitually blows a cool breeze (in the morning, before dawn). phou.

father, brother of the father, husband of the paternal aunt. hafem.

I launch the magical substance at them. ya pe he horou.

to launch a magical or malefic substance by placing it in the hand and blowing it; also said of the Spider-monkey Spirit when it projects its hairs to cause itching. horomai.

to be a little heavy. hutehe.

it had not been said to itself that the fruits were extremely hard and that it was better to give up on them. the prohohowemi ha ya the ha ta tiratai.

to tie, to bind tightly with a knot or very tight loop. prohohou.

black horsefly (unidentified). wãreware ãsi.

black horsefly (unidentified). wãreware.

sugar. kretetirimi.

sweet honey of the yãmonã bee. yãmonã.

the ghosts were frightened and suddenly disappeared. porepore ke pe ha kiriraruni pei ke the pe mratou ha peroherini.

they died. mrarariyo.

to remove the damaged part of food in a circular motion; to remove hot food from boiling water by stirring the liquid in a circular motion to make the solid rise to the surface. yakoreprai.

don't eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

to eat alone; to go to eat at a specific place (animals). ihimorãyou.

someone. alguien.

plant used to prepare a mauve dye (unidentified plant). hueekoweshi.

we went to look for leaves, each one by their side. yama hena pe ha thaapotuni haye ya e hena ki omarema.

go hunt paujies (each one by their side). paruri ke a ta niyaapotuhe.

each one by their side. thaapotuni.

to become flexible; to offer less and less resistance to penetration; to become soft locally. ereremo.

to be angry. tikuhu.

to have stopped at the entrance of a dwelling. hewea.

del otro lado Tilingo multibandeado agrandó a su vez la cavidad del peñasco. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

enlarged a cavity. piremarithaweni.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

to strangle. shiãrini.

stole (perfective). thomimorãyou.

the mountain Shãshãpiwei whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

a mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. Shãshãpiwei.

(myth): Woman-Flat-Stomach lies on her back. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

to be locally flat, flat. resisia.

to flap wings. prathethe.

small smooth-bodied catfish (Pimelodidae); its sharp spines are feared and fishermen break them to avoid injury. moshukunai.

to remain a long time in a surrounding position. ithorokotao.

the hekura started to smile. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma o a kasi watetou yakea ayakema.

to smile. watea.

he did not go there even once, and the bow covered with resin remained leaned against (something). mori the huu tao re mai, the hãtopi nahi sipo tapitapipi rakipraa heaa.

to be leaned against, to be propped up. rakipraa.

piel de cotinga azul. heimi.

to become beautiful (end of process). riyeheprou.

terminative suffix for intransitive verbs implying a gradual transformation. pro.

the people of Hukowe invited us. hukowe theri peni pemareki nakai kuprehei.

the people of Hukowe. Hukowe.

he devoured his brain entirely. pe the he yoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

to devour entirely, to consume completely. haikiprarema.

to have painted oneself by rubbing the body with dye. hirikirayou.

the fish will be peppery/spicy. yuri a nakiprariyo.

it will be peppery/spicy. nakiprariyo.

(speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). ishinapemi.

to warm myself. elo.

when the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to be hardened, twisted, deformed completely. tosheshewe.

ancestor. paoimani.

I am sure that they are sweet. the ki no kretetio no yaiopiwe.

expresses the speaker. ...piwe.

please, here we have to start being prudent. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to start being prudent, vigilant, attentive; to start being on guard. moyawetaru.

to be divisible. shekereamou.

some little birds fly away, even though they are mortally wounded. ai kirithami waharo pe yeoprou: algunos pajaritos se vuelan, aunque estén heridos de muerte.

to be between life and death. niyaiwei.

it is necessary that you cut the pijiguao palm. rasha wa si ha tuyereni.

father-in-law, you must enlarge the hole. shoape wa the ka ha premarini.

denotes necessity or obligation (deontic modality); can be translated as the verbs . tuyereni.

you have to say the truth. wa kãi rii ha pehetitaruni.

to say the truth, to say habitually the truth. pehetimou.

falling one after another (fruits). shithãi.

it was useless for the son to despair, they threw his mother into the water. pe ihirupi ke e puhi uhutuai ma perani, pe nii e kea shoamaparemahe.

despair; to feel deep sadness. perani.

He left his arrow feathering work to offer him a tobacco quid. p ee nahe e ha hipekini, shereka a he re huhekeiwei.

1. To get rid of something, abandon something (in a specific place). 2. To temporarily abandon a task.. huhemakei.

I will hunt at the site where the demons of the water holes live (lit. hawathokori pe re hirape totori ya pe taei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : there where the demons of the water holes live I will go to look for turtles). ).

malignant demons of the yai the class associated with said water holes. hawathokori.

to cling to a person with all one. huwehai.

upstream speech. ãpuru uﬁ.

upstream. ãpuru.

"I have just killed the beast", he said. "yaro ke ya re prakihe ye", a kuma.

to kill. prakihe.

whitish and soft stone like chalk used to sharpen burins. mãrohãshi.

to get oneself painted with round spots. hikikãmou.

the great jejenes exterminated the Yãnomãmi, they ate them all. peti nakini yãse nomãmi the ki waa hititiararema, the ki haikipracuñado, arárema.

to take something in its totality. haikipracuñado.

I did not remain calm, I stayed awake complaining until dawn. ya wai hore yãnikiprou mai, ya rããwã teteo he haruma.

to finish an obligatory task; to remain calm after having worked. yãnikiprou.

how beautiful are the leaves of the singing tree that is found downstream. ãmoã henaki re riyeherakiri ye.

that is found downstream. riyeherakiri.

to curl up, coil up, roll up in a spiral. akreteai.

(he) grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear off (the end of a long flexible object by pulling). huhetirayou.

maleficent supernatural beings associated with lagoons, who take possession of the soul of human beings. wawewaweri.

I gave them (to different people). ya pe hipeakema.

I gave them (to different people). hipeakema.

in this direction are my conuco and my house. kiha ke ya hikaripi praa kupiyeheri, ya shaponopi praa kure.

house. shaponopi.

turbid water. u koshi umoro si.

turbid, muddy (water). umoro.

to plant tightly. tiai shatitiwe.

to plant tightly or closely together. shatitiwe.

the jaguar had taken refuge from the rain. hiima irani ke a he wetiprarehou.

to take refuge from the rain. wetiprarehou.

cuando los brazos de Jaguar resultaron demasiado cortos como para abrazar el tronco del árbol (que se dilataba), enloqueció. iwariwe ke a pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma.

enloqueció. horihoma.

to form blisters (terminative aspect). poshoprou.

I soak the wapu fruits. wapu ya ki he paoai.

to soak, to submerge repeatedly. paotaai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). tayaraka.

we go in the same direction as the váquiros. ware ke ki mi re kuahare hami pemaki mi kuaai mi hetua.

to go in the same direction, to follow. hetua.

he maintains his wife in the lower part of the roof (of the home where he lives). pe suwepi a shikãmapou.

to care for, maintain, shelter a person in the lower part of the roof. shikãmapou.

The toucan flew in turn towards the broken liana that was still swinging, and grabbed onto it. Tucán voló a su vez ga un objeto) [yatukai, dur.

to stretch downwards. yatukai.

to let a fire go out, to let it extinguish gradually (by ceasing to feed it). wãnonãmai.

don't shout, so that your voice doesn't wake up my anger, I already told you to stay calm (lit. wã rahumotihe, pei wa wãni ware hushuo ka thaa tikoruhe, ya wã wasia waikirei ke a kurei.

to get angry while speaking, to start shouting. rahutou.

my older brother without doubt observed a flying guan, he shot his arrow. ãiwe ke a wãrini mãrãshi a norãmi yei taa ha ayararini, a niyaprarema.

without doubt. ayararini.

to become dented, to get dents. wãhihi.

I scratch myself (once) with the nails and also it can be The word 'weti' in Yanomami means 'to carry'. ya tikokoo.

to scratch. weti.

¿dónde los pondremos a cocinar. weti ha ke pema pe hariape.

mujeres, cocinen (en agua) los alimentos (preparen la comida). suwe pewe, nii pe ta hariapotuhe.

pon a hervir plátanos. kuratha ki ta hariri.

to cook in water, to boil in water. hariape.

I remained awake until dawn complaining. ya rããwã teteo he haruma.

complaining. rããwã.

eran susurros. mahanini the ã kuoma.

whisper. hanono.

they began to surround us. yamareki he hãyopraremahe.

they began to surround us. hãyopraremahe.

to start shaving one. mãrokoshipramou.

the woman did not stop sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. suwe ke a mi hore wãheãpraroma, yii ke ki ha a he yohoapraroma.

to hide the head in the hammock fabric. yohoapraroma.

(he) arches himself at the same time as a shaman and spots a game animal. patutoho do como chamán y divisa a un animal de caza.

to arch oneself at the same time. patutoho.

noise produced when blowing hallucinogenic into someone through a tube. shoi.

onomatopoeia, noise produced when blowing hallucinogenic into someone through a tube. shoi.

crouch there where you are, and put curare tips on your arrows. miha a rii ta yereiku, ahe namoku ta hiima.

crouch surreptitiously behind him. pei ke humapi hami wa kuprou ha hãthoreni, wa yereiku.

to crouch, to squat. yereiku.

plant, boroboro; Montrichardia arborescens (Araceae). It grows on the water. arborescens.

he is not angry (he is calm). wã oketiwe ke a kua totihia kure.

not be angry, speak calmly. enfrenwe.

oh esposo mío chamán, cruza el umbral de esta casa (lamento funerario). w ãroye a hekura kãi ta horeponi.

cross the threshold. horeponi.

it was because the woman was a scatterbrain that Teremi eviscerated her. suwe ke the mohoti kuteani teremini the re kakaprareiwei (mit.

suddenly when she untied them. kutaeni.

Horonãmi was carrying a tapir on his back, on one side of the tapir he had added a collared peccary, and on the other side he had added a deer. horonãmi shama a yehipoma, kama roroku ha poshe a yetemakema, ai ke a roroku hami preãri a yetemakema.

to add, to affix, to attach. yetemakema.

to become less rigid, to wrinkle due to the sun (a tobacco leaf). yakarokai.

confront each other only with sticks, do not tie knives to the tips. pe ta wapayo, hii ke hi shironi, sipara wama si hiihãi mai.

let's fight with sticks (the two of us). peheki ta wapayo.

to confront, to fight with sticks or clubs. wapayo.

to improve, to get better, to become good. totihita.

where did (he/she/it) go. weti hami a huherima.

where did (he/she/it) go?. huherima?.

to start floating. pokeprou.

snake. pookokoki.

"no estará ella simplemente engañándome" (se) dijo él. ware hore mirãmãi peo ma ta thawe.

1. to deceive oneself, to nurture false hopes, to be mistaken about someone. mirã.

he has added the chácharo over his side. ka komi shoawe.

he added the chácharo over his side. yetekema.

burn vegetation to clear land for planting. ishinomou.

when he reached the last part of his ascent, they (the two of them) made the tree dilate. pe poushokutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

1. In a process of approaching, poushokutou is located between the incoative and the terminative. 2. To place oneself for a while in the center of a moving line, or in the middle (the central part) of a curiara.. poushokutou.

animal that lives in a tree (unidentified). koweteroma.

calm down. a ta waikitaru.

calm down. waikitaru.

my son, go knock down wapu fruits (by hitting the branches with a stick). pusi, wapu ke ki wai ta yayopra.

to knock down fruits by hitting branches with a stick (especially wapu fruits), to knock down an arrow stuck in branches by throwing pieces of wood at it; to notch the end of a piece of wood in order to split it by hitting it against the ground. yayopra.

to improve the state of a sick person. wakakaamai.

bring here (on the back) a tangara bird (of the hehehemi species) from the Waika. waika hehehemi e siki ta yehimaparihe.

tangara bird. yehimaparihe.

to smell of carrion. sikiri.

we slept during the night and then descended from the mountain (upon waking in the morning). yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descended by a slope. timirayou.

forest that has not been inhabited. e naha ke pe ã shodo, selva que no está habitada.

1. to not have been touched yet; 2. to be the first to go to a place. shoma.

he lives with the "Whites" and shares their food, surely his tongue has become numb (= he does not know how to assert his rights, he does not know how to express himself). nape a re periope, a ni riape ha, aka wãri moyepiai ke the.

to share someone. riariyo.

to make an object thin; to thin out. repisiprai.

this time my mascot attacked the fierce beast. hei tehe thãriye a waini yaro a waitheri re shurukuapiyei e.

attacked. shurukuapiyei.

to be slightly yellow, brown. fashihi.

(he) kills someone. mratamai : matar a alguien.

to kill someone. mratamarei.

they were inserting their penis (in the woman's sex). weheprado introducían su pene (en el sexo de la mujer).

to cover oneself from the rain. wehekei.

to shake. hirihiri.

to be the first to carry out a trade exchange with a particular person or community. korãyoheriimaprou.

cuando ustedes lanzan los demonios de la enfermedad (no wãri) en dirección a seres humanos, éstos convergen hacia ellos (para contaminarlos). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

to converge (perfective form). prukarayou.

to cause eye irritation. mamo fraarei.

the chili pepper burns my eye. praki ani yare mamo fraamai.

to cause a very strong eye irritation. fraarei.

to become sticky or viscous. yãrekeãi.

they ran immediately to the garden to pick peppers. hikari hami praki a hukai mi rereo re shoatariyonowei.

they fled one after another. the pe rereokema.

to run, to flee running. rereo.

Bee. hihipa. It nests in tree hollows. Se aloja en huecos de árboles.

bee. hihipa.

(myth): Woman-Flat-Stomach lies on her back. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

to level, flatten. resisai.

He could take it. pe koãpe ke tao.

could, possibility. koãpe.

to cut (elongated objects) maintaining the same length (or the same height); to equalize quantities, values. usukai.

he had so much sadness that he quickly returned to the region (inhabited by his parents). yetu the urihi aheteai re korãyouwei, puhipuhipeni.

sadness, grief; restlessness. puhipuhipeni.

the woman did not take long to get pregnant. yetu ke suwe e kãi shipenai re kukeiwei.

the woman was pregnant and could not go fast. suwe ke a shipenapi yaro a haiprou maoma.

to get pregnant, to become pregnant. penai.

to offer two objects at once. horohokei.

to make someone release something by forcibly opening their hand. fimiki karoprai.

to make someone release something by forcibly opening their hand. kahu.

to leave a part of something for someone; to leave a remainder, not to eat everything, not to give everything. heikia.

peeled yopo grains. hiprusha.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

identified. identificado.

to separate, to detach (itself). ehaai.

to begin to spread the thighs (after having been in another position). yoratou.

to bend, to curve. toroko.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small sticks stuck around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, a dwelling or a camp by erecting a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or poles planted in the ground). ithorokoãi.

when I am like this under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after another all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects, at different times; can also connote a frequentative. -opro-.

village of malignant beings (yai the) associated with ashes, they can take over the pei mi ãmo of humans to cause their death. yupu ushiri.

this woman who has disappeared (she has fled to another community). hei re ãshi nohi re mraaiwei.

woman who has disappeared. mraaiwei.

did they not hurt my son-in-law (lit. wãriãprahihahei.

did they not hurt my son-in-law (lit.: did they not damage my house). wãriãprahihahei.

they (two) proposed to make Jaguar fall. irariwe ke a kemapii puhio yaro (mit.

they (two) proposed to make fall. kemapii.

vine; Ocotea neesiana (Lauraceae). pokora mosithoku.

shitawe. shitami.

to turn yellow (plants, plural object, dispersive). frãraprãwe.

the shaman removes the evil from the body of the sick person and sends it underground. the ki wayu hayurema, peithe hami the ki keamai.

to take, obtain by taking off. hayurei.

they were left crippled on the ground. the pata shikopi praa re hekeiwei (mit.

heavy, clumsy, dull. shiko-.

¿Los otros ya se les unieron. —ai pe warokeyoruu kuhe.

su hermano mayor todavía está con la gente de Wanapiwei. pe ãiwepi wanapiwei theri hami a no shoaa.

to be absent, to be missing. —ai.

bejuco masimasi. hesikaki.

we want (both) them to pass us, that's why we stop. yahe pe niya re hayuamakiriowei, yaheki uprapekirio.

we want them to pass us. uprapekirio.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. presheshewe.

upriver speech. atowa shifi.

upriver speech. peipei shifi.

upriver speech. shifi.

to hang upside down (like bats). mi wereo.

1. To sharpen a bamboo point. 2. To walk in water (upriver).. iroro.

to place something leaning against a long object, to put something along a tree or house post. hiririãmai.

to reflect on something, to look for a solution. imikiãi.

it is still a young tree and also it can be The word 'ke' in Yanomami means 'a, an'. huya ke hi.

the branch broke, he fell and cried in pain. hi poko keprou tehe a ha kerini a rããmorayoma.

the tree sways (repeatedly). pe hi ketaketamou.

placenta. ke.

Moyenayoma protected her daughter (from the jaguar) by mounting her on the roof. ha moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

Moyenayoma protected her daughter (from the jaguar) by mounting her on the roof. moyenayoma.

she realized that all she had was coal in her hand. oshohore wa ki mãopou ta no hoopereshini (mit.

1. To carry in the arms and against the chest. 2. To carry in balance on the shoulder (long object). mãopou.

to be or to place oneself. thãriri.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

deposit. papeheprou.

do not take many of those leaves (of that plant), the Yawari prohibit touching them. toai mai, henaki nowã thapou, yawari peni.

those leaves (of that plant). toai mai.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma.

faint noise, barely perceptible. warakuawe.

to bite a food. wakoko.

receive a part. shekerepei.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

muscle, flesh (as opposed to other body parts or organs); pulp of a fruit, sapwood of a bark. yãhiyãhi.

all the others hated us. komi the peni yamareki nohi wãripoma.

to feel resentment towards someone. wãripoma.

to be happy. hãhihi.

he cut it in two with a knife. sipara sini the hãniprarema.

cut it in two. hãniprarema.

making the tongue vibrate repeatedly. arerere.

to paint a motif composed of two crossed lines on someone. yãhiriãi.

my kidneys hurt. ya poushokupi.

waist, kidneys. poushokupi.

ancestor of mythology, contributed to the dissemination of tobacco. teshoriwe.

this verb is punctual. mau ke u ha pakini the miki.

to massage oneself, to caress oneself, to smooth one. hokoko.

to be partially dry, to stop being locally flooded. washitikei.

to have a period. naremou.

1. A species of large scorpion (unidentified animal or plant). 2. A character in mythology, representing an excellent archer, good hunter and good warrior. Uhutima reached the Moon with his arrow just as it was about to escape behind the clouds. The blood of the Moon spread over the earth giving birth to warriors.. Uhutima.

the woman Shapo konayoma hurries to come towards you. shapo konayoma a noshi re hariraaimi ye.

she hurries to come towards you. hariraaimi.

to rub (contact). hiririkei.

he arrived at a place where there were scattered blue-headed parrots (in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema.

there some began to paint themselves (in a dispersed manner). ki-prawe hami ai the pe yãmoprarou.

indicates that several objects in the same state are dispersed. -prawe.

to behave like a hekura (evil spirit). shaporimou.

scattered embers in the field, burned land ready for planting. yãrãrema no.

they slept (during the night). pe mio he haruma.

Oso hormiguero se dejó ir y se durmió. teperiwe ke a puhi wãri ha mrataruni, a mikema.

to sleep, to lie down. mioma.

to make unstable, to cause to wobble. kapuruprai.

I approached the enemy warriors slowly (and without realizing it). wayu pe rii ha ya aheteariyo.

to approach slowly (and without realizing it). aheteariyo.

to be very thin. tipikitipikirimi.

Yãmonãmãriwe was beautiful, was big and had dark skin. yãmonãmãriwe ke a ushuhuwe yarehewe totihitawe no kirii (mit.

to become dark green (tobacco leaves in fields: a sign that the plant is vigorous), to become slightly dark green (tobacco), to have dark skin color, to have dark brown eyes (like most Yanomami people). ushuhu.

he is happy. omaoma ãsihi.

to be happy. omaoma.

to twist, to flatten. tishikio.

to have light eyes. hushuhu.

he was in his hammock and swinging with his foot while whistling. estaba en su chinchorro y se balanceaba con el pie mientras silbaba.

whistling. silbaba.

a type of bird, Galbula sp. (Galbulidae) (lit.: sound signal of the snake waro, mapanare). ayupuhurami.

los dos niños regresaron a la casa para buscar tizones. ihiru ke kipi koã kopeheriiwei, koa wake niya ha tepiani.

amarró hojas sobre un palo, añadió un tizón, y se puso a trepar de nuevo. horotowe ke the hi ha yãã ke henaki ha okãpani, iha kai wake kãi yetea ha shoamakini, the torerea re kopeheriiwei.

tizones (pieces of burning wood). kopeheriiwei.

to become more luminous, to clear up (the sky, the clarity of the day). hiraharayou.

ellos tienen tubos huecos a lo largo de sus flancos. pei the pe repoku hami thora re ke ki hiririprawe.

tubos huecos a lo largo de sus flancos. hiririprawe.

to be hungry. shoetãi.

towards him/her/it. kakekuhacia.

señalar con el dedo. fimiki himio.

to point with a finger. himi.

come, you will defend us. hapohe, wamare nohi peyeap e.

to defend, to protect, to come to the defense of someone. peyeap.

to make several knots on the same object. moshokoreakei.

in the eyes, where the worms climbed, termites swarm (there). pei the mamo Zool.

to swarm, to teem. rãirãipraro.

to wait for daybreak to do something. harumai.

what are you doing then. weti ke wama the rii thai.

from whom did you get the momo fruits. weti pe riha momo wa pe rii riama.

a particle that has a syntactic function: it gives an emphatic turn, reinforces an affirmation, an interrogation. rii.

(no clear translation). ithã.

to hang upside down (like bats). mi wereo.

1. To sharpen a bamboo point. 2. To walk in water (upriver).. iroro.

as the mother (of her daughter-in-law) kept crying, the father of Tucán took pity on her. pe nii e miã he weyaa ha mayepirithawe pe hiini e ã nohi ohote thaarema.

to receive a person, to welcome. ropou.

to bruise an object in two places (carelessly). wãokãmai.

Pájaro carpintero enano se aferró al bejuco de curare y le dio picotazos (que se escucharon). mamokori ira ke a yaupe ha ripuhusiwe a ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

to peck, to strike repeatedly with a beak. yaupe.

to receive. pãyerekepei.

to kill a male person. frahaka hãwete.

"they have killed some of our enemies" is what you will hear said (lit. "rafaka re pe hãwetekema fa tharei", wamaki yimika kuu totihiope.

to shake or remove the bamboo tip from an arrow shaft. hãwethã.

to imitate the behavior of a jaguar, to roar like a jaguar just before going to war. iramou.

I was walking rapidly behind them, I did no more than run. ya re ropaa herayoheriiwei, pei ya shiro hi rereama.

quickly, rapidly. rápim.

rough leaf (used for polishing bamboo arrowheads). ãrãko ã.

rough leaf. ãrãko.

jo, let me descend (from your back). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit.

to make descend, to let descend (someone one is carrying). ithomarei.

she has a baby at the breast. oshe a yakapou.

the banana shoots are small. kuratha sipe oshe.

young, recent, new; baby, child. teori.

in the place where there is a very small conuco, an enormous bunch hangs from a palm that has a twisted base. hei the re patirahari hami, si koro re toyekere ha si hami, ei ke ki pata.

to burn in several separate places in the conuco (swidden farm). patirahari.

I move away in that direction chasing the little birds. ti: yo me alejo en esa dirección persiguiendo a los pajaritos.

It is good. Ɨhɨki ti.

that can be planted. the pe tiamou.

to move away, to go away. ti.

to hang. shikã nahi.

plegar el brazo (cuando uno estaba en otra posición). tishakotou.

edge, border. manikai.

They took the monster rahara out of the water and made it grow, it was their pet. rahara keki paa ha shoapariheni, keki ha yawemariheni, keki hiima pomahe (mit.

to make grow (a child, a domesticated animal, feeding it well). yawemai.

nos fuimos del lugar donde habíamos dormido, transportando a un enfermo adentro de un chinchorro colgado de una vara, que dos hombres cargaban. yamaki hokerayoheriiwei, pei yamaki hiki poma.

transportando a un enfermo adentro de un chinchorro colgado de una vara, que dos hombres cargaban. hokerayoheriiwei.

to dry by heat or smoke (terminative form). tetekeprou.

Onom. for the sound of thunder cracking. tãi!.

The kraya caterpillars eat its leaves. kraya nahi.

saladillo tree; Vochysia ferruginea (Vochysiaceae). kraya.

to be completely crowded (a place). hithokowe.

turn, return. koãpatariwe.

they left me on the banks of the Amiushiwe river, downstream. amiushiwe u ha, koro u ha, yare kãi re kupariyowehei.

river name. amiushiwe.

cassava flour prepared in a way that leaves some liquid inside. urera.

at night the hekura shake the cords of the hammock, they wake you up. titi ha hekura peni thoku thaki pe yomipraaihe, pe the hushuuhe.

cords of a hammock. thokuthaki.

he broke his arm with a stick. kama poko yahekirema.

to break an elongated object by striking it. naprushini.

to be hungry. shoete.

brother-in-law, it is not certain that you will catch me by the arm, because if you do we will push each other away. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to reject someone, push someone away. hãihãyorayou.

it is shiny like a wire. hawe ãrãpre ke ki sipo mimou rãtirãtiwe kuwe.

shiny, glistening. rãtirãtiwe.

you won't be able to express yourself better after drinking the spicy drink. wa aka ta hayuowei.

claim that from the Karohi people, since you know how to express yourself so well. hei karohi theri pe riha e ta nakare, wa aka ma re hayuowei.

to express oneself properly; to participate actively in exchanges; to emit an intermittent whistle by rotating the tongue. hayuomi.

they looked for them, but since there were no footprints, they stopped. the pe taeo ma kui, the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

they stopped. uprahaonowei.

plant; Spathiphyllum cannaefolium (Araceae). It grows in water, or in places where the soil is soaked with water.. Spathiphyllum.

spider web (upstream dialect). fãhãrãmãema.

to peel, to remove bark or skin. tiprokou.

the kittens have white spots (separated from each other). mishi ihirupi pe au patihiwe.

to have scattered spots or burns. patihiwe.

tranquil. mohotupe.

who broke my arrow. wetini sherekaye a keprarema.

who. wetini.

he took a large stone, as wide as that. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

to widen, to extend (a surface), to expand. rerahaai.

I will come when the day begins to decrease. the mi shinayuãi tehe ya hupe.

after the sun has set. shinayuprou.

snore. hohoruã.

to assign a limit, to put an end to an extension. kohoãmai.

to dig a shallow hole. maketi.

my hair is falling out. ya hesi prerei.

my hair is falling out. prererayou.

there where the ãpuri tree rises, there where a koshiro bee nest is found, I will go to collect honey (lit. ei ãpuri hi re uprayahi, ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni, ya naki ta ruwemoma.

to destroy a beehive to harvest honey (lit.: to deprive of warmth). ruwemoma.

to rub or shake one's feet together to remove dirt before getting into a hammock. mamiki yaisiprou.

to rub or shake one. yaisi.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and crush your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to crush something by hitting it with a stick. yatikiamai.

he will reappear here. a petou koyorupe.

he. petou.

—Is it beautiful. —a riyehewe. —No. —ma.

Is it beautiful?. riyehewe?.

qué mandón es ése. kurahe the wai ta nosiyemou piyeapraowe.

expresses astonishment. nosiyemou.

curare of the myth discovered by Carpintero verdoso. mamokori ira.

Siroromi appeared when the great fire was burning. wake pata wauwaumou tehe, siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

to arrive, to come. wauwaumou.

became viscous or sticky. yãrekerayou.

he still has the clothes in his hand. ei siki hoã hohipou shoaa.

to have grabbed with the hand (to carry). hohirei.

Zool. Zool. , lizard (unidentified (animal, plant)). , lagartija (no identificado (animal, planta). Lives in underground holes. ).

lizard (unidentified). reama akatho.

we followed the watercourse downstream and (scared away) paujíes that took flight. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. werepokirini.

female spirit associated with mountains, she is the owner of the waters with which the sick are cleansed and purified after a shamanic healing. hehuriyoma.

the very old man, who had been lying for a long time in a hammock hung between two trees, began to bite the shosho fruit. pata totihiwe a re hakokotionowei, shosho mo wayoai re kukeiwei.

to hang or have hung a hammock in the open air; in an antithesis or joking manner: to live in the collective house. hakokoo.

heel. mamiki teshina.

heel. teshina.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit repeatedly. kesheo.

the child was already stiff from death. kasheshewe ihiru ke a wãri kua waikirayoma.

to have an erect penis. mo kasheshewe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. kasheshe.

to submerge a food in water, to cover completely with water a food that is being cooked. shototoam.

me di cuenta de que le habías regalado vestimentas a la gente de Tokonawe. tokonawe theri pe rii ha wahe siki ma re hipeakenowe thai.

place name. toko.

to receive a deep wound that cuts the scalp in half across the skull. yakaropei.

to dream incessantly. maharimou yashushou.

to dream incessantly. yashushou.

do not be always grabbing our prey. yamare niipi waiamatihe.

do not be always grabbing our prey. waiamatihe.

to recline an object that was perpendicular to the ground, to incline; to make a celestial body decline (in mythology). kaiamai.

he woke up at the moment when day was breaking. the haruu uheheprou tehe a rãrãyoma.

to pass from night to day, to begin (the day). uheheprou.

to give or receive many objects to/from the same person; to take many objects. prukakei.

Arena. fekatahu.

to fish by tying a line to a branch. fãsitha karoramai.

to fish. -tha.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco.). serimi.

my brother-in-law can repeat to them not to do it. heriye ke a wã no wasiaprarou tao.

to prohibit them from doing something. wasiaprarou.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to descend vertically. wahohou.

I have an eye irritated by a foreign body. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to get an eye irritated by a foreign body. ripuripupiai.

to hesitate, to vacillate. rãikikiãi.

he put me next to a thick tree like this, like this, with my arms pressed against my body (the speaker imitates the gesture), he also made me as small as he could. e naha kuwe the hi ha ya hiririoma, wãisipi yokokowe ya kuoma.

with the arms pressed against the body or gathered on the chest. hiririoma.

to have several holes. tiroshowe.

the packages (of fish) had just finished cooking when a heavy rain began to fall. pe pe hãro ripiprou hititio tehe, yetu maa ke pe horã pata re petarurei.

to dry tobacco over the fire (southern Orinoco dialect). fpee nahe ripiprai.

to cook, to boil. ripii.

to kill someone; to attack, to assault someone. weherariyo.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

to bite suddenly (a fish biting the bait). yomirei.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

he arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to follow, walk behind. nohã.

to remove a bamboo arrowhead from its shaft in the manner described; to kill a man (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). frahaka yãweteãi.

to make something spin with the arm (as one does when using a sling or bolas); to loosen an object that is attached to another (or to the ground), by pushing it slightly from side to side, to remove a bamboo arrowhead from the arrow shaft in which it is inserted. yãweteãi.

I will come visit (lit. ya huko pe yororowe waehetariyo.

to enter a dwelling unexpectedly, to appear suddenly. waehetou.

I will show you how to do it (to walk silently). pe mamiki weape.

to teach, instruct, inform. weape.

to be afraid. ãsikeãma.

"my domestic animal attacked the fierce beast there", he said. "thãriyeni yaro a waitheri re shurukuapiyei", e kuu yaioma.

attacked. shurukuapiyei.

to perforate, to make a hole, to open a package. horosha.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

thanks to. kure.

his younger brother appeared at dawn. the mi wakaraai tehe pe oshe a re petariyonowei.

at dawn. petariyonowei.

I express my impotence. ya the pe wã feheprarai ha.

express my impotence. feheprarai.

pliega el brazo (fold your arm). poko ta tishakoiku.

to bend, to fold, to hang in an arched shape. tishakokei.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

glance. ojeada.

he wanted to grab the branch of the tree. hii ke hi poko niya ha huweani.

to grab, to seize, to catch. huweani.

he was the one who exterminated the váquiros. ware, ihini the ki mi re watheanowei (mit.

exterminate. watheanowei.

to wedge, jam or hold an object firmly between two others. wãki.

to construct a temporary shelter (a child). yarithakei.

to cook. shiriki.

1. to grow (human), 2. to make an arrow slightly longer than usual, 3. to be slightly long (arrow). tireheai.

to produce a dry cracking sound (insect crushed with nails). prisimou.

to produce a dry cracking sound. prisimo.

"He managed to free himself", they said. "suwe a hukeprou tao", wa hore pu.

to manage to free oneself from a restraint. hukeprou.

1. to roll up, to wrap around something; 2. to tie, to wrap, to make a package by wrapping a tie around; 3. a package tied in that manner, wrapped, rolled up on itself, coiled. yãthori.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw mucus). fhushihipi.

to smooth out; to homogenize. kopehea.

to have been partially visible (after having been hidden behind an obstacle). waeherayou.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

truly. ina.

a tree fell on the path. hiini yo shea.

to fall (said of a tree). shea.

they introduced a pluma caudal de loro into the lobe of each of their ears. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya ke teshinaki huuararema.

they introduced (plumas caudales de loro) into the lobes of their ears. huuararema.

they are the ones who ensure their protection, they are. the ãhã wãri hayupouhe, the wãri.

they are the ones who ensure protection. hayupouhe.

they advanced towards me with their gaze fixed on the ground, looking for my footprints. pe the mi teateapraroimai kuperei, yare mãyo taeihe ha.

to walk with one. teateamou.

fear will make me turn my face away. ya kiriri mi huruprarou kukei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial).

to turn one. hurukei.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

to become loose, to loosen, to become unsteady. proroai.

to stay for a while in a surrounding position. corokoprao.

now, immediately. waiha.

piece of wood whose sides have been flattened in this way. pahayema.

they participated in the ceremonial nocturnal dialogue, and at dawn, they exchanged goods. pe wayamoma, matohi pe ãhã pou henaomahe.

to dialogue. wayamomai.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to bend, curve, or fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. thorukuprou.

the tobacco is getting moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to dawn. rohoroai.

the shell/skin of a fruit that is cooked over the embers. ehaprou.

to soften smoked game meat by cooking it in water; to soften something rigid, to soften bark. uhutamai.

you are the one who has forced them to walk quickly. kaheni ke wa pe wãri hore ha hushushuponi.

to force to walk quickly. hushushuponi.

to suck by sucking in (like sucking sugar cane or marrow from a bone). wasusuarei.

(he) wanted to see if there were seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open or gut multiple animal objects longitudinally. eririrarei.

if you refuse to do it, I will throw dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to throw dirt (sand, mud) once on a person, to punish a child in that way. pahumai.

when the child was climbing (on the tree), a certain number (of women) stayed behind to bathe. hei ihiru a tiketia ha yaiikuni, ei naha the pe yãrimou ha heikuni.

to do it quickly. tiketou.

adolescent bird. koriroma.

because she was pregnant, she could not walk fast. a shipenapi the nowã hã a haipronomi.

because. haipronomi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). peupeu.

in front of the closed exit of the dwelling act as if brave: we will pierce their bodies with arrows. hei naha yoka pata weeo kuope ha pe mi ta nonopraru, pemaki pehi kãi wãri wahepramai totihirayou.

to act as if brave. nonopraru.

to launch an object so that it glides. reramarei.

as (the turtle) had its head sunk (in the shell), it observed it and turned it over several times. pei ke pe he wai taroa ha yairini, a mima, pe mi hatuatarama (mit.

to become deep, to dig deeply, to deepen a hole. taro.

he lay down in the hammock painted with transverse lines. thoo ke thoku tiprutawe ha a perikema.

painted with transverse lines. tiprutawe.

as they wanted to protect the women, all the men had mixed with them (in the group on the march). the pe nohi niya hore ha peyeaheni, suwe re pe rii hami wãro re the ki komi re nikererayoheriiwei.

they had mixed with them (the women). nikererayoheriiwei.

to start scraping, removing the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting it superficially, cleaning the bottom of a pot by scraping it. hokekeprai.

the wariomi koheshi spiders move around. wariomi koheshiki erekou.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the (enemy) shamans, to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

spider. koheshi.

having dirtied multiple objects. shamirariyo.

he cut a banana leaf and planted it in the ground. ketipa hena ha pahetireni, hena ithãparema.

he cut. pahetireni.

to be angry. takakarimi.

you all do not demand any goods. mato hi ke wama ãhã poimi.

little brother, if there are chicks, we will claim one. oãsi kakara ihirupi ke pe kua ha, pehe a wãhã wãri pope.

to claim, to demand. wãha.

to have finished tracing several lines on one. tikekepramorayou.

tree. esceae.

to become a shaman, to have been initiated as a shaman. herii.

he went there to cut a young bamboo (for making blowgun darts), he set off again, and saw some Yanomami. rihu u ha oshe hãnireheruni, a hua ha koroherini, yãnomãmi a tararema.

to cut a young bamboo (for making blowgun darts). hãnireheruni.

I have an eye irritated by a foreign body. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to get an eye irritated by a foreign body. ripuripupiai.

their corpses were scattered on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

they discovered the black-painted sorcerers scattered (dead) on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe (mit.

to scatter, disseminate, spread on the ground. tikukukei.

to become short. horotoai.

we left the arrows to dry in the sun in a clearing in the forest where the trees leave a piece of sky exposed. the misi ka yakeo kuope ha yama pe shereka ropramai.

to leave arrows to dry in the sun in a clearing in the forest. ropramai.

within a moment the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky), he said. waiha, iha mothoka yahatotoprope, a re kuuwei.

to descend to the ground. yahatotorayou.

to be too high (wall of an object), to become concave outward, to hollow out a gourd to make a bowl, to make a wall concave outward. wapokoai.

Yotenama broke the spine of the older boys. yotenamani pe re mãrãnãpiwei pe mi kreama.

to break the spine of a living being. mãrãnãpiwei.

to crackle. shãiãmo.

to probe (the hole in the rock). hipiakei.

to divide (a long object), bifurcate, split, become bifid; to divide into two groups that follow divergent directions. pakaraprou.

to lose its extremity. hemathaprou.

you, you always lie. kahe wa horemou no motai.

don't lie. wa horemope thai.

lie, deceive, pretend. horemope.

the blue body of Yãmonãmãriwe did not take long to swell. yãmonãmãriwe yetu ke a pata hãepotopi hããi ha kuparuni (mit.

to have swollen, to have inflated, to have dilated. hããrayou.

to slip suddenly out of position. wahoprakei.

to become a little deep (of water level). ayaraprou.

you will go to ask for arrows from one hearth to another. shereka wa pe nakai mi athope.

to go from hearth to hearth, to make the rounds of the central plaza going from one hearth to another. athomarei.

to be bruised in one place. si taokoa.

succession of periods during which fishing was alternately good and bad. imãtããi.

Rabipelado was crushed under the rock and the macaw people rolled on his shattered remains on the ground to paint themselves. nãroriwe pei ke makini a nahihoma, a nahihiwe yapikope hami arari pe tihirumoma.

crushed, shattered, crumbled, crumbled. hiwe.

the Waika make shelters covered with moriche palm leaves and thus take shelter from the rain. waika pe wãrini eteweshi masi hena yãno ha thaheni, pe wehehou re hearati.

to take shelter from the rain. wehehou.

to make war. yahatuayou.

approach the shore each one from a different place. pe ta hashirio rãikiomopotu.

to manifest in various different places. rãikou.

I was stung by a twenty-four without realizing it. shihoni ware the tikai totihionoma.

twenty-four. shihoni.

the Waika, down there, kill many cotingas. kihi waika a re perirati, ei a no eimipi re sheorati.

cotinga. sheorati.

ant; Pheidole sp. (Hymenoptera: Myrmicinae). It is extremely aggressive.. shiriana.

to fold. yorekeai.

he wrapped the magical substance in the fibers of a ceiba tree. wari ke ma naheki ha heri a yãyokoma.

to wrap/envelop a magical substance. yãyokoma.

we transported what remained of the váquiros on our backs. ware yama pe shee re yehihipouw e i.

we transported what remained of the váquiros on our backs. yehihipouw.

I'm going to sit on one buttock. ya roa kayarekei.

to be twisted, to be placed in an unstable position. kayarea.

to produce pots. turere.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

water. agua.

to adopt a form. torohe.

the sun is already declining. mothoka kaiwe waikiwe.

to be inclined, to be oblique, not to be perpendicular to the ground. kaiwe.

to mess up someone. porukamai.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually (said in the south of the Orinoco). yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

to fall asleep gradually, to spend the night in the forest during a journey. mikeherii.

they threw numerous personal objects. matohi pruka a hoyaremahe (mit.

in the stomach the ashes of the dead swell (after ingesting them in a banana compote during a funeral ceremony). pei pusi hami matohi the pe huruu totih i w e.

your cursed arrows hit their target perfectly. wamaki wãri hore matohipi niyao totihioma ma re kui.

personal belongings, possessions (excluding cotton and feminine objects); the bones of an incinerated corpse; weapons (arrows, bamboo tips or poisons), the heri and everything that serves to kill. hoyaremahe.

he/she is dead. a waiyorayoma.

to be dead. waiyorayo.

hallucinogen whose effect does not last. wayu horotowe.

don't eat the prosi siki snake, it causes dreams (about absent people, the dead). prosi siki watihe, ki no thapipi.

something that causes a dream. thapipi.

when I was going there, passing by they made me give food. kihami ya hutayou ha, nii ya ki wapou hayuyoma.

to make someone give food. hutayou.

to have protected oneself in that manner, or to be already protected. hikoromorayou.

clear, limpid, translucent, white. herushi.

to break off branches. mãho.

extinguish the roof fire by throwing water on it. mãu ke uni hei yaa ke si wake misi ta rumakihe.

extinguish (a fire). rumakihe.

¡Yo me voy a emboscar río abajo. kamiye ke ya praokirio e.

¡en la mañanita estuve bajo el efecto de los alucinógenos. ya prao re henaopoi ke.

to ambush, to lie in ambush, to be under the effect of hallucinogens. yeteke.

to transform into a vampire bat (mythological). emida.

to fold the edge of an object several times. shãkomai.

¿dentro de cuántos días vas a ir a Mahekoto. weti naha the no ha kupraruni mahekoto hami wa hupe.

A place name. Mahekoto.

he inverted the bamboo tips on the arrow shafts. rahaka ke ki posi nomihãma.

to invert, to turn over. nomihãma.

my. ia.

we progressed slowly downstream, one after another. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

progressed slowly one after another. hirihirayou.

ni siquiera tengo ocumo para cocinar. ohina ya moku tuai ma marani.

las plantas de ocumo quedaron aplastadas con la caída de un árbol apia (en el conuco). apia ke hini ohina ke a sheparei kuhe.

ocumo. ohina.

He/she is not there. Amo naika.

to be absent, to not exist. naika.

Punta de bambú sin. hohotowe.

something similar to the phosphorescence of fireflies has just come out. hawe amakuri ke ki wake re hetirihe (cha.

1. Glow worm; firefly. 2. People of supernatural beings associated with the glow worm.. amakuri.

to be short, to be shrunken, to be low and rounded (an object); to be short (a person). fataka.

to be below, to be at the foot of. pehithea.

to be locally narrow (hole, opening). wãtetou.

sit here. heha a ta roiku.

Sloth came down and sat immediately slowly. shimiyeteopewe a ha ithoruni a opi roa shoakema.

to sit, to be seated. warama.

se golpeteó los dientes. pei e naki hupehupemoma.

(él dijo) "lo comí" y se dio golpecitos en los incisivos con la punta del índice. "ya warei ke a kuroi", pei e naki hupehupemoma.

golpetear. hupehupemou.

in the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants sprouted spontaneously. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to sprout, to grow spontaneously. urerou.

The one who was beautiful was called Kuyarowe. katehe a re kuonowei, kuyarowe a wãhã kuoma.

Name given to Õmawe in the communities located south of the Orinoco River. kuyarowe.

a poisoned dart grazed my neck. pei ya orãmi si ha rifuma maipariyo kuhe.

grazed. maipariyo.

the women went in that direction to break by hand thin sticks for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. urofuro.

to divide, to split into parts in order to take one part. shetekerei.

on the slope of a hill or mountain. ftiwaro ha (mi).

we arrived at the other slope. ai the tiwaro ha yamaki re pareyoruuwei.

to be situated on the contour of a hill or mountain. ftiwaro.

when they were close, they gathered to bathe. pe oweai tehe pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma.

gathered. yãrimou.

to authorize or send (once) someone to do something. nape shimiãi.

to authorize or send someone to do something. activinape.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

truly. ina.

to be completely skinned, to be completely peeled. tiproka no.

to become spicy (food). prakipiai.

to lower, to bring down (something that is too high). totakei.

to behave like a hekura (evil spirit). hekuramou.

it was Kaw. kaw. 's father who informed us. kahiki re hiimouweini yamareki yimirama.

informed us. hiimouweini.

to become infested with worms. moshapirayou.

leaf. koe.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yãnomãmi have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to perforate, to pierce by repeatedly pressing with the hand (a long and pointed object); to inject, to give an injection. hiwehekei.

to smoke (in form of smoke). wekeke.

at the moment he turned his back, Rabipelado shot him with a blowgun dart with deadly substances. a humapi reprou tehe, protho.

sound made by blowing a blowgun to launch a projectile or harmful substances at someone. protho.

I struck to collect tima honey, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to make an opening in a hollow cylindrical object; to open a hollow trunk (by striking). pashe.

what is coated with a black resin (the inside of a gourd). no ushimamou.

what is habitually coated with a black resin (the inside of a gourd). ushimamou.

during clearing, to fell several trees on the same side so that they fall with the fall of a thicker tree. pakakuamai.

to drag, to pull, to haul, to drag something in a fall. pakakuai.

they went to look for termite nests (each one to a different place). ã r epo koko pe kãi teapotayo kuhe.

to go to different places. apotu.

the spider monkeys move along the branches of the horoweti trees. horoweti hiki poko hami pasho ke pe imima.

they move, they displace themselves. imima.

there are many footprints only in one place, where they broke bushes with their hands to mark their passage. hii ke hi pe re keapotayowehei pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

to compress with. kãshiki.

to have been trampled, to have been trodden on, to present footprints. kãshikã.

hammocks hung in the middle in different places. iyoprawe.

to make thick or dense (plural objects). supraakei.

to be about to have oneself painted by someone. yakirapramorãyou.

I struck to collect tima honey, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to make an opening in a hollow cylindrical object; to open a hollow trunk (by striking). pashe.

they were laments of women (crying for a dead person) and also it can be The word 'suwe' in Yanomami means 'woman'. suwe re pe miã kuoma.

he will not be the husband of the two women for long and also it can be The word 'suwe' in Yanomami means 'again'. suwe ke kipi pou no teteheprou mai ke the.

woman. suwe.

to rub with the fingertips to clean. horokorariyo.

we will walk during the night, since we have just recognized the path. titi ha ke pemaki kuaaheripe, yama yo ma re katitipramarihe.

to walk. pramare.

sparse, thin, not dense. resheshã.

you (young people), go hunt animals by chance. posheye fortuike a ta niyaprahe.

by chance. fortuike.

Exclamation of surprise or amazement. poho!.

bird, Barred Antshrike; Cymbilaimus lineatus (Thamnophilidae). shoapeepeemi.

to have the thighs separated, to separate them. yoraai.

to evaporate completely. wehepei.

to walk until dawn. harurayou.

to become locally flabby, wrinkled or soft (duration 2). wãpretou.

to reach an excessively ripe state (plural objects). poshoropirariyo.

cucarachero (bird belonging to the Troglodytidae family). otomi.

Oh. ipa ya waiamai heparoa ta kupowe.

state, duration. powe.

shitami. shitawe.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. hãshãemai.

I am walking. uu wakatai.

to walk. wakata.

cuñado, es lo que te digo sinceramente (lit. shori e naha suwehe ke a kuu wawetoowei.

to say sincerely. wawetoowei.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while observing the surroundings (when an attack is feared). fkohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; in birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. fkohesi.

dense, inextricable (vegetation). rasis.

to be loose, slack. prihã.

Get out. a ta hari.

Get out!. hari!.

the ancestors decided to fight hitting each other and sang a hunting ritual song. poreri ke the pe tuyeyou puhio yaro, the pe herii ha kuponi.

they fought hitting each other. tuyeyorayou.

to place in parallel (next to each other or on top of each other). werere.

to fatten a living being by feeding it well. tapimai.

to fatten. tapimai.

they approached to see. the mii mi re ikukeiwei.

what are you going to do. weti ke wa the thai mi huu.

where is he going. weti hami a huu.

to go somewhere with a specific purpose. huu.

to have mastered the art of wayamou, to have mastered the skill of ceremonial dialogue. kareherayou.

Wild squirrel was perhaps about to run back. wayapashiriwe ke a no rerea mi yaparayopi.

wild squirrel. wayapashiriwe.

Baba had the habit of going to the forest to cook her packages of caterpillars over the embers. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

to cook wrapped food over the embers. ripipraai.

to turn around, to turn over. mi hatuo.

to turn around, to turn over. hatu.

the child did not come down and he abandoned him. ihiru a ithonomi, a takeherima (mit.

to abandon someone. takeherima.

the wariomi koheshi spiders move (by climbing). wariomi koheshiki erekou.

to climb (a tree). nahitha*.

upriver speech. oponi.

to have a numb limb, to feel tingling. potete.

to be perplexed. puhi weti nahamou.

the hunger torments me and I am perplexed. ohi pe wayu ha ya puhi wetinahamou.

to be perplexed. nahamou.

the tree is hooking with another. hi mi thorukuai.

to have bent/curved/folded under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; to have a tree hooked with another when falling. thorukurayou.

to succeed someone in a job, in a ceremonial dialogue. nomihipramai.

to clean an object, make white, paint or color white. aupramai.

I really want to have sex. ya peshi ma ta yaitani.

Nosiriwe complained about not having tobacco. nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

to have a strong desire for sex; to lack tobacco; to be angry. fpeshi.

tortoise; Platemys platycephala (Chelidae). moshotomi.

fwãyumi ayou: sin. fwãyumi ayou: sin. de wayumi h u u. de wayumi h u u.

camping. wayumi.

as they did not stop committing incest with their daughters, they remained in the dark (= the day did not dawn). pe yaweremotii ha kuparuni, pe he titirayoma (mit.

they did not stop committing incest with their daughters. yaweremotii.

we orient ourselves and return to follow the path. yamaki re kateheprouwei, yama yo nosi re tea koreiwei.

we orient ourselves and return to follow the path. kateheprouwei.

to have become concave on the outside (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). wapokorayou.

they got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

1. To get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people). 2. To detach and fall one after another (fruits). weyoyoai.

on the summit, on the peak (of a mountain, of a hill). fpororo hami.

on the summit, on the peak. fpororo.

there, on the summit of the mountain I abandoned a deer. mihi, matotopiyei ha preãri ya prapei kuhe.

on the summit, on the ridge of the mountain. matotopiyei.

the rocky face of Mount Mashohara shines beautifully. mashoharapiwei ki pariki pata re shutukahe noshi re harirape e.

rocky face of Mount Mashohara. Mashohara.

with her hands she was raising and lowering rhythmically the cotton, it was a new and large ball. shinari re uku pata yokomamoma, tute re the ki pata.

she was raising and lowering rhythmically objects that belonged to the deceased. yokomamoma.

as we don't have a shotgun to hunt, I will kill you with my arrows in turn; I am really going to wash myself with soap (lit. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani, ihi a ma kuini pe wãri prapou mi fetuo ta totihio.

to speak like people from upriver. pashimou.

ser distintos unos de otros. picayaiatarou.

the termites will start hollowing out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororoprarei.

to start hollowing out. hororoprai.

on the path he transformed into a supernatural being. a yaiprariyoherima (mit.

supernatural. yãihihi.

the fish that swirl around in large quantities (= the fish that swim in large quantities in the river). hei ki re shurirorati (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to flutter, to be stirred up or agitated by the wind, to swirl around in large quantities. shuriri.

he took a great stone, so broad. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

to be vast, to be broad. rerahawe.

force someone to give something. kanarei.

those who were taking refuge (on the mountain, to escape the flood) brought ocumos near with poles to plant them. pe he re ruonowei peni, pe niya ha tiaheni, ohina pe rekamahe.

they brought near with poles. tiaheni.

to have a sinuous or broken line painted on the face. mi eyekea.

to become bruised or battered. taoko.

the cut of the tree is deep. hi ka mi shoekewe.

to cut deeply (a tree). shoekekei.

to clean a place. yasikiai.

he put a gourd with water and smoothed his hair with wet hands. mãu ke the u hore wãri ha pakini the miki wãri hokokooma.

I have my hair cut irregularly (= I have my hair cut badly). ya miki wãrekã no.

hair, head of hair. miki.

food that falls apart during cooking. kohihipei.

I make myself called. ya nakamamou.

I make myself called. nakamamou.

to let food stick to the wall of a container during cooking. sutimapei.

log, firewood. ãkoshoku.

tree with large seeds. kayoromi.

go fast to see what that unknown noise is. yan rápido a ver qué es ese ruido desconocido.

fast. rápido.

the forest is cleared (without bushes, without undergrowth). the urihi noshi takakawe.

to be completely cleared or bare (ground). takakawe.

bushmaster snake. cuaima piña.

snake, bushmaster. cuaima.

to undulate, to produce waves. kitakitamo.

to make a longitudinal mark, to scratch someone, to cut or cause a cut to someone, to damage a roof with a machete blow from top to bottom (longitudinally in relation to the petioles of the leaves that cover the roof). yakekekei.

Iewe brought cassava (to offer upon arrival). ieweni nashi hiki re perakeherayouwei.

the place of the statement, or place of reference, is different from the place where the action takes place. keherayo.

you have avenged your relative (by killing a person who belongs to the same community as the killer). e naha re a hiima kuwe wama a koã waikirema.

to take revenge, avenge a death. fhiima.

serpiente, sapa, mapanare (falsa). Xenodon.

to be in a slightly more fluid state than thick and pasty (like yogurt). thepehehe.

to avert one's gaze so as not to see what is happening, to show indifference, to refuse to respond to an urgent call. miã hã rakiprou.

to avert one. miã hã rakipro.

it was The Beautiful One (Õmawe) who planted the leaf in the ground. katehe a yai re kuini hena ithãparema (mit.

beautiful (referring to living beings). katehe.

to become slightly reddish, to turn reddish. teãyãrãyou.

to kill a brave man (and thus put the enemies in distress). yapekeprai.

to share the food of others. niithã.

(myth): Woman-Flat-Stomach lies on her back. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

to be locally flat, flat. resisia.

to bend, to curve upwards. ekou.

we regrouped and threw ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to fall or slide into water, to dive, to throw oneself down a slope. nihoromaparei.

short, truncated, oblong. homotowe.

he went over there to examine the paths. kihami pei ke yoka pe horea miãprarama.

to move around looking carefully around oneself, to search for something in that way. miãprarai.

in dreams, to dream about something. fmahari ha.

to dream without ceasing (southern Orinoco dialect). fmaharimou yashushou.

to dream, to have a nightmare. fmahari.

tobacco makes one lose strength. pee naheni the pe moyepitam a i.

to lose one. moe.

(related word). shihoko.

omawe koheki roared at nightfall. omawe koheki pata re rario re weyarakiri.

mythical being; it has a feline head, huge arms and is arboreal. It attacks men to devour them.. weyarakiri.

cricket. kuyuma.

come to get us. wamare ta koreyo.

they began to detest us. wamare nohi wãrirema.

us. wamare.

to become dusty. ekrãpiprou.

to lose one. moyepirayou.

when all of them had revived, they got up quickly. the pe horiã ha hititiraruni, the pe hoketama (mit.

to heal, to revive (after a shamanic healing). horiprarei.

to build shelters near a collective house. sipomou.

when he had already left, the shaman went out of the house and called the jaguar with a whistle. herani, ira a horomirema.

when he had already left, the shaman went out of the house and called the jaguar with a whistle. horomirema.

to be hungry. weehe.

the blood started gushing out. yeiye ke ki, siriri, siriri.

blood gushing from a wound. siriri.

to clean oneself. wamoreãi.

to remove or detach something by scratching with the nails. titheprai.

my scalp hurts because of the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to experience a painful sensation due to a superficial injury (an irritation, a tear of the skin, a burn, a blister, etc.). hushii.

I imitated the call of the gallineta bird. a wã nokaprariyoma: yo imité t horoi.

I imitated. horomireni.

(As) he really knew tobacco, he asked: "Don't you lack tobacco. pɨɨ nahe tai yaia yaro, e the wãrima: "pei re wa fori re ke. ". ".

to lack, to be in need of (something). fori.

fabricar un objeto bello. riyeheprai.

(antonym). tureke.

go away. vayas.

as the woman was in love with him, she fled with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

to make a woman flee or facilitate her escape; to flee in the company of a woman one loves. wahiai.

to take, receive or give a large amount of something. hothetheai.

when I am like this under the effect of hallucinogens, I usually fight against the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after the other all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

to repeatedly perform the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects at different times; can also connote a frequentative; equivalent to -opro- for intransitive verbs. wãrii.

to cut down a tree, to fell a tree with an axe. kayapamou.

cuando tenían hambre, preparaban frutos wapu (mezclándolos con agua), y se los daban de comer (de manera regular). oheo ke tehe wapu ke a thaheni upe koapramahe.

es por temor a las picazón que producen los piojos que ellos se afeitan la cabeza. noma pe no shiki kiri ha thaheni pe he mãrokoshipramai.

to consume, to eat, to feed. thaheni.

to dance in the central plaza during a festival with another community, to participate in a presentation dance. prai.

if my father-in-law arrives, we would all leave. heyeha shoayeni yahi re a prokomarema yamaki komi wihio shoakei.

to return, to go back. wihiãi.

to let food fall apart by negligence during cooking. kohihãmãi.

dreams. sueños.

to have wrinkled buttocks. fkoroku rukuwe.

buttocks, rump. ruk.

Mujer-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

flat stone. resisiweni.

the river is rising. u petii.

the river is at its highest level (or: it is full of water). u petiwe.

to be full, to be satiated; to be at the highest level (of a watercourse). petiri.

Elder, important man. peyeprayoperiami.

you are always whimpering. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to sob, to whimper. eheehemoti.

to be getting oneself painted by someone (perfective). yakiramorãyou.

sister, come closer. amiye, wa ha aheteikiyoni.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

to approach, to get close. ahetekei.

to palpate, to crush with fingertips. hutikio.

to palpate, to crush with fingertips. hutiki.

to make spin an object 180 degrees; to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemimai.

Of the numerous prey, I will kill one. de los numerosos váquiros, yo mataré a uno.

I will kill. mataré.

to take, to remove. fuke.

I saw in a dream the emerald-colored bottle birds throwing out magical plants (heri) from their beaks. aroaromi koshi pe ãhã re kure ihi the pe pehi mahari yutuhoma.

to jump over something. yutuo.

there were knives, but the two children have damaged them and there are no more left. kushiyo re pe kuoma ma kui ihiru ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

knife. ushiyo.

the Shamathari wove an open-weave basket, pressing the fibers together, and tied it to the child's ribs. shamatharini yorehi siki sheniniprai a ha tuyerini, ihiru repoku ha siki rekema.

a basket of open weave. sheniniprai.

he bends his arm. poko ta shãkotaru.

to swing arms exaggeratedly while walking. fpokoku.

they had fun splashing each other and submerging each other's heads in the water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to forcefully submerge someone. kaoay.

that can be smoothed; liquid that can be homogenized. kopehamou.

the people of Poriporimapiwei detested us a lot; we were very agitated. poriporimapiwei theri peni wamareki napemai heparoomahe.

we were very agitated or upset. heparoomahe.

above the waterfall the nest of jejenes (a type of insect) was swinging. pora a hetu ha peti naki pesi yãteyãtemoma.

to swing, sway, rock. yãteyãtemoma.

to breathe rapidly, to pant. ferefere.

"He managed to free himself", they said. "suwe a hukeprou tao", wa hore pu.

to become untied, to free oneself after having been immobilized by someone. hukeo.

I got down from the hammock several times to rekindle the fire. ya ha ithotoni, koa ya wake pe yetaai kuperei.

to rekindle a fire. yetaai.

"Where is my part of the loincloth. "weti ipa napeyoma ke a. Did you tear yours in two strips (to offer me one). wa siki sheririprarihawe. ", why don't you say that. ", wa re kutouwei.

why don. kutouwei?.

move away for a moment. a ta payeketaiku.

move away. payeketaiku.

what is that. hei weti.

who are you then. weti pei wa ta thawe.

what fruits are those. weti pei ke the ki.

this/that, what. weti.

(one day) you will hear it said that we have killed some of our enemies (lit. "rafaka re pe hãwetekema fa tharei", wamaki yimika kuu totihiope.

to kill an enemy. hãwetekema.

to have flaccid and hanging neck skin (bird). prehuwe.

soft, tender, flexible. heyau.

cassava plants. diatamente.

you will realize the consequences of your action later. waiha wa no wai shihiroprarowe.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to be in a sad situation, to be disgraced, to be defeated; to engage in an action that will have dire consequences. hiro-.

the fish shake and also it can be The word 'ro' in Yanomami means '(no clear translation)'. kupe ro.

shake. ro.

to become deep (the night). ithãthãtou.

yo le había prevenido, desgraciadamente él se empecinó. ya wã ma fai tehe kama re the fe prakekou tikoo kuhe.

to be stubborn, to insist. prakeke.

the Yanomami would want to kill me to take possession of my wife. yãnomãmi the pe wãrini yare shei puhi ha topraoheni.

to kill someone in order to take possession of their wife or prey. topraoheni.

they shot numerous arrows and the noise they made when falling was heard. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

noise produced by numerous arrows falling to the ground. thohuthohumou.

to hang a hammock in a tree by tying it between two branches. puuai.

to hang a hammock in a tree by tying it between two branches. puuai.

the crested curassow's crest is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to bristle (fur or feathers of an animal). mãrirãi.

I don't make any noise of broken branch (I don't make any noise), I just walk dragging myself. krai.

do something in vain, without thinking or carelessly; be content with; happen without apparent reason, happen by chance. krai!.

cut in slices the cooked wapu fruit. fwapu hikei.

to cut in slices the cooked wapu fruit. fwapu.

to be forming breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). fãkãmi.

the kittens have white spots (separated from each other). mishi ihirupi pe au patihiwe.

spotted, burned in several parts. patihi.

to kneel. hitheikei.

the pijiguaos have many bunches. rasha pe ikrehea.

to tie something tightly winding a vine around it. ikrehai.

sour, acidic. nashiwe.

to make the broth of cooked meat taste strongly of game meat. nashiprai.

he refused to give away the knife. sipara si a noshi imãpoma.

to refuse to give up an object. imãpou.

tener un ojo vuelto. mamo henowe.

estado. heno.

he stopped, thirsty, every time he passed near a hole with dark and foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

stagnant water contained in holes and depressions. roaamai.

he is a good hunter of tapirs. a poko no shamapi.

good hunter of tapirs. shamapi.

as it rained a lot I was wet and chilled. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

was wet and chilled. totihioimani.

to be angry. ãikã.

as you do not fear anything, you always go out. wa si no sãiyopiwei ke wa horeprarou ta kupiyeni.

to not fear anything. sãiyopiwei.

the old man was dragged dead on the floor of the house. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

to drag a long object on the ground. hiririremahe.

to hide multiple objects behind something, to disguise multiple objects by interposing something. shãhomai.

listen attentively (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. kahiki totou.

listen attentively. yimika ta.

a sharp instrument made of poor quality steel whose edge bends each time it hits a slightly hard object. pruekou.

to have a dull, bent or damaged edge (for a sharp instrument like a knife or axe). prueke.

became viscous or sticky. yãrekerayou.

the canoe is in the usual place. copulankãã.

the canoe is in the usual place. copulankãã.

Kaw's father (the person whom Kaw calls father) informed us. kaw.

his/her father, his/her male elder relative in direct line. hiimouwei.

to become invisible (by hiding). hitheprou.

to take or obtain a large quantity. thetherei.

listen well. yimika ta hoyãpari.

listen carefully. hoyãpari.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to tell someone to scratch once to another person. hukekeamai.

to turn around (perfective). mi rakikei.

to turn around, change sides, be turned around, turn one. rakikei.

a plant of the genus Costus (Costus anachiri and Costus glabratus). pukunama.

pliega el brazo. poko ta tishakoiku.

pliega el brazo. tishakoiku.

in the past the Yanomami did not have banana passionfruit plants. hapa yãnomãmi peni yahatotorimi pe thaponomi.

banana passionfruit. yahatotorimi.

and in that region there are many sloths and also it can be The word 'ta' in Yanomami means 'will'. ihi the urihi ha ihama pruka a huu (mit. It is a Particle. ).

there. ta.

the Mount Maiyo rose up again, in a very visible way. ki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini (mit.

to rise up, to become visible. shatiai.

to be covered in dew. hemaãhupiprou.

to do something among several people. hetutuprai.

the foreigner killed one of ours. nape ke a wãri ishou kuhe.

foreigner. kuhuroma.

in the place where there is the waterfall of the váquiros. waretha a pora re yaupe.

waterfall, cascade. yaupe.

les voy a romper de verdad el omóplato a con el talón de un hacha. hãyokomani pemaki pootopi wãri yahekiprai ha totihironi.

shoulder blade. hãyokomani.

they have blown horeprema at us, they have directed it towards us. kiha horeprema ke pehiki wãri horashikei ma re kurohei, hei horeprema hiki ma re yarepiyekiri.

magic plant cultivated, guate; Maranta arundinacea (Marantaceae). Women pulverize it, deposit the powder in the palm of their hands and blow it against the adversaries of their community in the course of a battle, to provoke their flight. The powder can also be spread over the footprints of enemy warriors, to weaken them and cause them leg pain; delayed in this way, the enemies can be reached and attacked.. horeprema.

a moment ago I hit a pigeon. hoya ya wai tihekiprarei kuroi.

to start to reach or hit a target with an arrow or pointed object. tihekiprai.

As they wanted to take possession of his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

I took the gallineta from a hawk (that had killed it). koikoimi iha hãshimo ya he rumakema.

1. Protect someone. 2. Recover (a stolen good from a thief); take possession of (the wife of a murdered man, the prey of a predator). ruamai.

Millipede returned on its tracks. kumã yonii mi ha paoimani (mit.

manner of moving of millipedes; to crawl towards prey (a feline). yoni.

Baba and his wife had the custom of going alone to the forest to cook their packages of caterpillars on the coals. iwariwe sho, pe suwepi sho, uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaatii re ayaowei.

also, equally, with; in company of; it also has a coordinating function. ayaowei.

your son-in-law. hemamahe.

it is shiny like a wire. hawe ãrãpre ke ki sipo mimou rãtirãtiwe kuwe.

shiny, glistening. rãtirãtiwe.

to appear (after). waehe.

he placed his garrote across the branches. himo ke a pririparema.

they have to make you sit in the middle of them. mi ãmo ha ke wa re romaparewehei.

to place, to put. pare.

1. To live without ceasing in different places. 2. To lie awake without being able to sleep.. shimakao.

tree. oshe.

we will walk during the night, since we have just recognized the path. titi ha ke pemaki kuaaheripe, yama yo ma re katitipramarihe.

we will walk. katitipramarihe.

do not move, stay still. a kuaatihe.

do not move, stay still. kuaatihe.

Cachicamo ate all the honey. moroni puu upe waa hititirema.

all the honey. moroni puu upe.

to wait for the depth level of a lagoon to decrease a lot before going to kill fish in it. thookoroprou.

to finish putting water in a container. huyukuprou.

to become shallow, to decrease in depth. resikei.

how to do it. weti naha.

what does this look like. weti naha the mimou kuwe.

how do you weave a basket. weti naha wa the rii tuyei kuaatii.

what could that be. weti naha wa ta thawe.

how, what, how much, what kind. naha.

Arrendajo la agarró por el entorchado de algodón que ella llevaba alrededor del pecho. ãyãkorãriweni shinari iki re harepouwei ha a huerema.

algodón. shinari.

to make deeper, to deepen (perfective aspect of the inchoative). koeherayou.

to become ripe, changing color (fruit). shoporayou.

to be (epistemic modality). kuperei.

to kill. atat.

to divide, to separate. shekerai.

to rise (the level). huyukuai.

to start doing this for a moment. u shimoretou.

to make whirlpools (the water). shimoremou.

they did not enter (our house), they passed the night going around it. pe hanomi, pe ãyoãprarou he harutoma.

they passed the night going around. ãyoãprarou.

the spotted-faced cat. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

to be spotted or mottled locally. hayapishia.

teach (songs), distract, hinder the proper development of something, bother, obstruct. yapekai.

to attack the enemies. shi karukai.

to attack enemies. karuku.

to make back-and-forth trips (on the same route). yapayapamou.

I raise the hammock, which is too low. yii ke ki yahatotowe ha ya ki isiamai.

let the tobacco grow well, above all do not dry it when it is still too small. pee wa naheki isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai.

to raise, lift up, elevate. isitamai.

moriche palm. flexuosa.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

to insist repeatedly before someone to send them to do something; to reiterate a request several times. shimitaai.

the little one was stuck near a shallow burrow. m ochicamo pequeño estaba atascado cerca de una madriguera poco profunda.

small, little. ochicamo.

he arrived after his departure, he has a light complexion. a wãri haa hepei ma re kuroi, a prushishiwe ke a thai.

to have a light complexion. prushishiwe.

Tiger snake hunter. Erpiente tigra cazadora.

tiger. tigra.

the fierce animal approached rapidly. yaro ke a pata re ikuikutakeiwei.

to approach rapidly, to direct oneself swiftly towards. ikutakei.

Jaguar raised the head (and said): "What if I climb. ira a mi ha nonoikuni.

raised the head. nonoikuni.

to become sad when a loved one is absent. okimai.

to be cut off a portion (of a flat and round object). a yakosia.

to be cut off a portion (of a flat and round object). ayakosia.

to transform into a young woman, to transform into an adolescent, to reach the age of procreation. mokoai.

a little light. rehehe.

to cry for a dead person. tutomou.

to pleat (perfective aspect of the incompletive). wãhikei.

to lean against an elongated object frequently. hirikio.

here is the tapir bathing descending the river. ei theepi kãi pata yãrimou mi re werepe.

descending a river. werepe.

cuando ustedes limpien la parte del conuco invadida por la maleza, las espinas de la planta kãmoãrima los rasguñarán y chorrearán sangre. wamaki yasikope hami kãmoãrima peni wamaki i yepe rukekotii kukei.

part of a conuco (cultivated plot) that has been cleared of weeds. yasikope.

to become dark (at dusk). itutuprou.

to freeze. preyurapiprou.

do not speak in a low voice, so that I can hear your voice when I am asleep. opi yare ãhã wayoai mai, pe ã he tharerei.

I saw a specter in a dream. pore ya he tharerema.

1. To hear noises while sleeping; to dream of someone, of a place. 2. To have a vision while under the effect of hallucinogens. thareai.

to make something medium-sized or rather large (in relation to the usual size of the object in question). prowehekei.

noise, signal that precedes the return of the hunters. fheniyomi pe heã.

a prolonged expedition; a hunter who goes camping for several days in the jungle carrying food with him, to look for game animals, which he will bring back to the dwelling after having smoked them in the camp. This meat is generally consecrated to the realization of a funerary ritual, or intended for the guests of a feast that brings together several communities.. fheniyomi.

the great jejenes exterminated the Yanomami, they ate them all. peti nakini yãse nomãmi the ki waa hititiararema, the ki haikiprarema.

they exterminated them all, they ate them all. rárema.

río abajo (allí donde vivo) no tengo machete, vamos a la selva sin llevarnos nada (lit. koro hami ya pe sipara thapou mai, yamaki shiroko tutuai totihio kuperei.

la mujer no tenía hijos. suwe shiroko a kuoma.

without, lacking. fshiro.

pointed rocks at the bottom of a stream. shirikiprawe.

hoko siki. hoko siki. It looks very similar to the prosi siki snake, but it is longer than it. Se parece mucho a la serpiente prosi siki, pero es más larga que ella.

snake (unidentified). hoko siki.

(no clear translation provided). hãshãshã.

they were lying together in the same hammock, without anyone knowing. ke kipi yakao hãthooma.

lying together. hãthooma.

Tucán utilizó afrodisíaco y así transformó la mente de la mujer (para seducirla y llevársela a su casa). mayepirithaweni a ha kumireni suwe ke a puhipe yai tharariyoma.

to transform the mind (for seduction). tharariyoma.

I also. kamiye sho.

Dormilona and Tigra cazadora painted their bodies (myth). wathaperariwe sho, wereshãã sho the kipi yãmou kupariyoma.

Baba and his wife had the custom of going alone to the forest to cook their packages of caterpillars on the coals (myth). iwariwe sho, pe suwepi sho, uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaatii re ayaowei.

also, equally, with; in company of; it also has a coordinating function. wapepraa.

to let something smell bad (through negligence). wãriãmãi.

The plant cultivated is Lagenaria sp. Õ koã ãsho koa hesi.

plant cultivated; Lagenaria sp. (Cucurbitaceae). o.

the itching manifests in several places. the pe shihiti rãikãi.

manifests in several places. rãikãi.

the irokiri nope are all the time lying in their tiny vine hammocks. pei ke pe thoopi wai yai re kui irokiri ke nope ha wa pe shiro ta perihi thare (cha.

hammocks. tudinales.

woody shell containing a nut. kosisi.

we moved away as quickly as possible. yamaki rope sheyesheyemoherima.

to move rapidly; to swim quickly. fsheyesheyemou.

we will arrive now at the place called Kãmohãwe (downstream). kãmohãwe ha hei tehe pemaki kuaai shoaparekirio.

place name (possibly a river name). kãmohãwe.

he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River. he rãyoko.

(he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). rãyoko.

to become concave on the outside. wapokou.

I speak. opoporema ãhu.

to speak. opoporema.

to start to become big. pririri.

that gives the urge to vomit. the pariki shi harihamai.

to cause numbness or the urge to vomit. harihipramai.

to be hungry. shenini.

upon arriving they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter, spread out, disperse objects on the ground. yapikirei.

in all places the smallpox decimated the Yanomami (lit. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

to decimate, to make disappear. piyekeo.

null. krokoshi.

hair condition that makes it rough and granular. hoso.

to hit someone with the fist. pariki shei.

to hit someone with the fist during a ritual fight. paromena.

it was him who kept my head underwater. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object underwater by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kaokoparei.

(while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk). ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei (mit.

to swell, inflate, dilate. hiriai.

to bruise in one place. si ãiki.

to decline, move away slightly from the zenith (a celestial body). yoteherayou.

to be soft, tender, flexible. epehewe.

the tobacco is becoming moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to mold, to become moldy. rohoro.

the tembladors gave me several shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador (electric eel). tihekira2.

llevar a cabo la venganza por sangre (lit. hiima toayou.

dog. hiima*.

I'm going to look for awarakurimi fruits. awarakurimi ya ki toai.

edible fruit of the awarakurimi tree, harvested often in large quantities during the rainy season. awarakurimi.

he got lost and found Cachicamo on the way. a ha mohoruruni, moro ke a tarareherima.

he got lost. mohoruruni.

as the yawari woman confused me, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to change one. aithaai.

extend the head for a moment to look. hiyãhãtou.

they abandoned the house after arguing. the pe nowã thayou ha kuparuni pe shurukuokema.

to chat, converse. nowã thayou.

salpicado, manchado, sucio de arcilla o de tierra. kroapi.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent (under the weight of the tapir climbing on it). kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei (mit.

small bow for a child. ithothema.

¡ay, fui mordido por una mapanare. aroami keki wãrini yare si wetia yaire hai ke.

venomous snake; Bothrops atrox (Viperidae). mapanare.

a whistling call was heard. the pe husi heã petariyo k u r e i.

whistling language. paruu.

(In the myth) Apparition felt fear and was startled. pore ke a ha kiriraruni a ãtiprariyoma.

to startle, to be startled. yoke*prou.

a type of fish, pavón estrella or pavón cinchado (Cichlidae). Cichla orinocensis.

a type of fish or tree. orinocensis.

bend, fold under the action of a weight. yashoai.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to submerge, sink momentarily under water. paot.

she is still a virgin (lit. kama yãnopi hami ya mioriz.

virgin (a woman). mioriz.

he approached them, he spoke to them, they recognized him, they were afraid. a ha tikukutoni, a ha hamorioni, the pe horiã ha hititirarini, the pe hoketamama.

to approach, to get close. tikukutoni.

Frog arched its back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch forward, to arch the hips forward. hiketeãi.

immediately she rubbed against her, and she insulted her. mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma.

we are both ugly and bad, and we have insulted each other. peheki wãri wãritiwe yahatuayou totihio ke a kuhe.

to insult someone, to offend them by publicly proclaiming their physical imperfections (real or presumed). insultado.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the (enemy) shamans, to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey. hãho.

to start producing shavings/chips. akaweshiprai.

I burned myself in a fire, and that's how I became big. kai ke wake ha ya ha yaponi ya pata prerayou kurei.

to burn, to get burned. yaponi.

rope, cord. kapuya.

the night began just to unfold. the mi titi noshi ma hariraai ma peoherii tehe.

to unfold, to spread out. peoherii.

to make a fire blaze. wamaai.

the. te.

to receive two objects. horohopei.

to be about to have round spots painted on oneself or something in that manner. hikikipram.

I approached the luña. etemakema: me acerqué al luña.

I approached the luña. etemakema.

if you insist on going you will make yourself be killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini wa shemoparu.

to make oneself kill. -mopariyo.

A repulsive being that guards the fire where the souls of the greedy are consumed. Watawatawe.

I was moving away a lot. ya payekama.

I was moving away a lot. payekama.

to lie one next to another (elongated objects); to lie down next to each other (people). hohãthãkei.

ithore 2 vb. ithore 2 vb. trans. trans. t ithoreamai, caus. t ithoreamai, caus. : to curve, to bend something. : curvar, doblar una cosa.

to bend. doblar.

encarámense (sobre la plataforma) uno al lado del otro. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to line up frequently one next to the other, to squat down frequently in a line. rãyopraai.

in an instant we painted our faces black and on that background, we traced sinuous lines with our fingernails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to trace a line on the face or body with the fingernails. tikekekei.

to be piled up, to be stacked. heruyutuwe.

(to have) a father-in-law/son-in-law relationship with someone. kahiki hekamamou.

to have a father-in-law/son-in-law relationship with someone. hekamamou.

as the woman yawari clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to cloud one. yãwãriyomani.

perfect form of the inchoative verb . ishirayou.

to bruise in one place. wãokãi.

he hurried as soon as night began to fall. pe the ka mi wai suprahatou tehe a wãri re horeprarouwei.

when night began to fall. suprahatou.

to be constantly turning over in a hammock. mi hatuhatumou.

to turn over several times in a hammock. mi hatumou.

to turn over, to turn around; to change sides in a hammock. hatuo.

his mother was really anguished. pe nii ke the puhi haruprou yaionowei.

to go crazy, to become anguished. haruprou.

the visitors no longer come because they do not give anything in exchange for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

to give something in exchange or compensation, to give an object in exchange for another. koãmaihe.

to recover, to get better (health state). wahuprou.

he will squat down below, he will spit out the pathogenic principle. fei kitato ke ki peﬁthe ha, fei faye a re perire.

to spit out. peﬁthe.

las palmas manaka rodeaban la base de un pequeño montículo. e ha, manaka yahatoto hami the pehi kãi ha tiwaroikuni.

rodeaban. tiwaroikuni.

to build temporary shelters to sleep in. e naha mothoka kuo tehe, heweriwe a mimou shoa.

to sleep. shoa-.

to fall ill due to wãrihotho. t wãrihothoãi.

to fall ill due to wãrihotho. wãrihotho.

to reply immediately. nokaai.

to clap the hands together. fimiki pohopohomou.

to clap the hands together. pohopohomou.

to fork, divide into two. pakara.

when one is a neighbor and has avenged the dead, there is no need to threaten each other again (if one really does not want to go to war). ei naha the pe hiimapi toayou ahetou mi hetutou ha, wã teteo kotãotihehe.

to threaten each other again. kotãotihehe.

to have those sinuous or broken lines painted on the face. mi eyekekei.

to have sinuous or broken lines painted on the face. mi eyekekei.

the child is very hungry. koyoshi keekeemorewe.

to be very hungry. keekeemorewe.

perico cara sucia; Aratinga pertinax (Psittacidae). hirihirimi.

mosi. sururuaemi.

female spirit associated with powerful hallucinogenic drugs. ayukumariwe.

they stopped visiting us because they became friends with Yeprope theri. pe pe kãi famamou mrakema, yeprope theri ke pe noﬁmaihe ke yaro (habla de río arriba.

to become friends with someone; to feel friendship for someone. nohimai.

night. mãhu.

to describe a curve. hipoye.

cacao trees. pohoroa anahiki.

cacao (plural form). anahiki.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

fragmented, broken into small pieces. nakashirariyo.

the crested curassow's crest is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to bristle (fur or feathers of an animal). mãrirãi.

Centipede carved Jaguar's feet and gave them shape. kumãrãwe ke ki wãrini, irariwe ke mamiki yakekerarema (mit.

to scrape the bottom of a container (generally with a gourd), to brush, to carve (to shape an object), to strike short blows with the edge of a tool, to produce shavings. yakekerarema.

to capture, seize, grab (multiple objects). huwerarei.

Tucán voló a su vez ga un objeto) [yatukai, dur. thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepiritha1 vb. 1; yatukou, dur. intr. 2; y aen dirección a la liana rota que todavía se batukuprou, term. t yãteãi, inc. ; yatukurayou, perf. : balancearse [yãteãmai , fact. del inc. o caus. ]. ; yãteyãtemou, dur.

to balance, to swing. yãteãmai.

a concave mark (due to a fold, a blow or pressure). wãhihou.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. hitataprou.

They fled when the jaguar appeared. ari huyeron cuando apareció el jaguar.

they fled. ari.

Father-in-law, let fall in pieces the honeycomb. shoape pei ke aruku ta kemarari.

let fall in pieces. kemarari.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with plant residues or dry leaves. heshãheshãpi.

those who made the cotton balls carried several with them, and accompanied (the visitors). shinari uko re thaiwehei the pe ha yehiarariheni pe nokaope.

they accompanied. yehiarariheni.

if I kill you with my arrow, you will have a fierce demon ãiãmo in your chest because of me. kamiyeni ke yare niyaprarema wa pariki no ãiãmopi uprapariyo.

you will have a fierce demon in your chest because of me. uprapariyo.

(yo le digo) a mi cuñado: "vete con tu perro a matar chácharos" (lit. heriye ke a hore re kui ha.

brother-in-law. shori*.

1) that can be taught; 2) to eat a food by cutting it with the incisors, to eat a cambur in that way. weheri.

aunque allá el enemigo sea aterrorizante, yo me propongo atacarlo (lit. kihi kitanari a pata re fuopiyei, a no ma kiriai tehe, a nape niya rii keo totihiawe.

puma; Felis concolor (Felidae). kitanari.

cuando tenían hambre, preparaban frutos wapu (mezclándolos con agua), y se los daban de comer (de manera regular). oheo ke tehe wapu ke a thaheni upe koapramahe.

they gave them to eat (regularly). koapramahe.

do not speak in a low voice, so that I can hear your voice when I am asleep. opi yare ãhã wayoai mai, pe ã he tharerei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

I saw a specter in a dream. pore ya he tharerema.

the effect of hallucinogens. he tharemai.

Baba escupió el fuego cuando se pusieron a reir; wake hopraretahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waima. poreri toiwariwe ke a wãri ikãprarou tehe, wake hopraretahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waima.

they began to laugh. toiwariwe.

they prepared gourds, as they intended to consume pijiguao porridge on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

the Ugly One (Baba) returned home. a wãri koã kopema.

to prepare, divide, reduce to powder/ashes, smooth the shaft of an arrow, carve bamboo tips. kopema.

trajeron. yehipireherima.

I arrived after sunset. weyahawe ya kopema.

sunset, nightfall. weyahaw.

it is still new. a tute shoawe.

not long ago they came to enlarge the cave of the babilla (to reach it and kill it). iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

Here is a wad of tobacco, a wad prepared not long ago. pee nahe tute, pee ke nahe tute totihiwe.

recent, new. tuto.

había cuchillos, pero los dos niños los dañaron y ya no hay más. kushiyo re pe kuo ma kui, ihiru re ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

destroy, damage (perfective, plural object). wãriãrãrei.

when you are thirsty, you roll a funnel-shaped leaf and thus collect the water from the trickle that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

funnel-shaped leaf (for putting something inside). oshokorek.

cord that serves to hang a hammock made of lianas. thoo thokutha.

Rope or cord for hanging a hammock made of lianas. thokutha.

the. el.

it is far upriver. the prahapohori.

far upriver. prahapohori.

to possess a large number of certain objects. thethepou.

to let water evaporate by distraction from a cooking food. weheamai.

as Macagua was angry, they retraced their steps. prereimariwe ke a hushuo the no wã ha, pe e he tatopariyoma.

to go back, to retrace one. prer.

to have a swollen groin lymph node. moshipepi.

lymph node of the groin. moshipe.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. hitataprou.

to call (someone) moroshi; to address (a child) using that kinship term; to be in a father-child or older brother-younger brother relationship with someone. moroshimou.

dry, smoked. tetekea.

they found the jaguar dead, it was swollen and lying on its back. ira a nomawe tararemahe, a pata shuweturoma, a mi pata rekekepraoma.

to be lying on one. rekekepraoma.

frente. weyoku.

wire-tailed manakin, male. patau.

to align tightly (the strands of a basket). shaninirei.

to leave something to become deformed or hardened like leather. prihãmai.

Scrape it quickly with the machete. siparani wa the ha horerehorereprarini.

to scrape, rub, or clean using the edge of something (like a knife or machete blade); to clean or scrape something with a split vine held between the hands. shorere.

the lateral branches of the trees, those that are inclined towards the ground, have hollow fruits. kararu hami re hiki poko mi re weteteawei hami momo ãsi tikowe.

to be naturally directed towards the ground; to be twisted (towards the ground). wetewe.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

dominate by size, be larger than. morokowe.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

object that was worked by crushing it with the incisors. washisha.

I clean the tube for inhaling drugs (by removing it from the inside with a stick). thora ya ka hishãi.

What if I put a little stick in his anus. ya pe posi wai ta hishãpraa sho.

to probe a burrow, to clean a tube by inserting and agitating a long thin stick. hishãi.

he clung to the treetop, which bent under his weight, and stretched out his neck to see. hii ke the hi wai ihete noshi hariraai ha a oraki kayahaapraroma (mit.

Carpintero enano swelled up and the platform (on which the corpse was placed) spread out. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini, hii hiki noshi hariraama (mit.

to extend, deploy, spread out, distend, dilate. hariraai.

that one to whom the mouth of X calls father. X kahiki re hiimouwei.

one to whom the mouth of X calls father. hiimouwei.

they had fun, they participated in the presentation dance. the ki iriamoma, the pe praiama.

to participate in the presentation dance. praiama.

light-colored. ohotu.

(a mirror) superficially dirty. opa- umokoyoripi co.

superficially. opa-.

without the others knowing it, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. hãthoãkini.

It has sprouted. Puhutuai wakexi.

to sprout, to grow (new sprout, new branch). puhutuai.

they danced one after the other and, when they finished, night fell. the pe ha praitaaruni, the pe ha prairini the mi titiray o m a.

we will go towards you dancing (the hekura say to the novice who is being initiated). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye (cha.

to execute the presentation dance during a festival that brings together a community (or several); the guests dance first and then the hosts follow. prairayou.

don't think you can immobilize me by holding me around the waist. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to tie around someone. hãrokoãi.

hurry up to look for them while it's still day. pe taei ta haiohe, pe the haruo ke tehe.

hurry up, be quick. haiohe.

that one to whom the mouth of X calls father. X kahiki re hiimouwei.

one to whom the mouth of X calls father. hiimouwei.

to be pointed, sharp (rock). shiririwe.

to soften (something), to make (something) soft. krããhãmai.

if you refuse to do it, I will start throwing dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to start throwing dirt (sand, mud) at someone, to start punishing a child in that way. pahuprai.

the ãro vines are really very tough. ãro ke the thotho pe ﬁhuo fa yaioni.

tough, resilient, hard to break. ﬁhuo.

it seems that they want to attack me at all costs and I am still waiting for them. ware niya hoã shurukai he yatiprouhe ha ya pe no ma re tapou shoai.

they want to attack me at all costs. yatiprouhe.

to accompany, to go along with. peramokei.

to hollow out (multiple objects). hororomai.

it trembles momentarily. u rayukai.

to tremble momentarily. rayukai.

to become less concentrated, less thick. rehererayou.

Bachaco was cutting down trees. kasheshewe yorehi si tuyeprai shoarayokuaaiwei.

Bachaco was cutting down trees. shoarayokuaaiwei.

ellos (los hekura) vuelven a coger el can-. ãmoã a koãi re kopohe ye.

to take back, to recover. kopohe.

put yourself for a moment in the center of the group (or: put yourself for a moment in the central plaza). a mi ta tharitaru.

put yourself for a moment in the center of the group (or: put yourself for a moment in the central plaza). tharitaru.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãm a.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. Horomãmi.

to be locally bright, white or clean. shutukahea.

cut poles and use them as levers to drag it (a human being) on the ground. hii wama hi ha perarini, yaro a hore hamorimai ta poohe she.

to cut poles/sticks, to use poles/sticks as levers. perarini.

if he got only one he would stop complaining, he would make as if nothing. kotãope mai, ya mohotuo titihiope.

would make as if nothing. titihiope.

the path ends (is increasingly invaded by vegetation). yo he kohoãi.

to become impassable, to become blocked (a path, a stream of water). kohorariyo.

to become disheveled (hair). porukai.

imitate Rashakami. rashakami a ta oweprari.

he imitates his father (= he behaves like his father). pe hii a owepou.

to imitate, to act like. oweprari.

an ancestor accompanied the winged termites to the sky. poreporeri osheri ke pe rii ha the ha nikereroherini.

to accompany, to go along with. poreporeri.

to be hungry. tokrekemi.

when the novices are made to inhale the pore henakini plant (at the time of their initiation), they become able to regurgitate the plant during a shamanic session. pore henakini yãnowãmi wa the he horai kukema, pe henaki pehi thao.

magical plant substance. henakini.

to have been entirely dirtied, stained. hãhiãma.

I will tell the women to go kill fish (in the lagoon). suwe pe rii ha yuri ya pe shemararei.

to kill fish. fyuri shei.

(perfective form of kapeai) found by searching with the foot. kaperei.

weeds, vegetation that regrows on land that has been previously cleared or burned. kaukau.

they met, without knowing it, at Honey's hearth. yãmonãmãriwe ke hãtopi nahi ha ke kipi re kuariyonowei.

honey. yãmonãmãriwe.

to become weak, exhausted. he pahatoko.

they ate, and then they slept. pe ha iyarini pe mioma.

they ate. iyarini.

bamboo shaft. yohomi si.

bamboo shaft. yohomi.

father-in-law, here is the honey (of the mashipuma species). shoapemi, hei mashipuma ke a kua kure.

father-in-law (vocative). shoapemi.

repetition. indi-.

The water is becoming foamy. Yãã henaki mosipeki ponerse espumoso.

to become foamy, to produce foam. moshiai.

was loud (noise, voice). nakrerayou.

the water was still/calm. u mamo tetehewe.

still, calm. tetehewe.

straight, rectilinear; correct. shaririwe.

I precipitate with them. ya wãri hore yea narekei.

I precipitate. narekei.

(he/she) spit once. kahu upe keyekei.

to spit once. kahu upe keye.

spirit associated with the red brocket deer. preãriãthawe.

to cut the primary flight feather of a curassow and shape it to be used in making arrow fletching. heki kretitiai.

to cut and shape the primary flight feathers (of a bird). kretiti.

knot. moshoko.

to make thicker or denser. supram.

to become dusty, to get covered in dust. hekãhekãpirayou.

to never miss a shot. yaketou.

to never miss a shot. yaketou.

female spirit that enters the bodies of shamans when they take hallucinogens, causing them to clench their fists and convulse. yãruanayoma.

catch the oshe aka termite soldiers by inserting a stick into their nest, and offer them to my brother-in-law. oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe.

offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). hipekihe.

to be covered, to be under. mubajo.

to be locally rigid. kasheshea.

to be about to request help. eripramou.

hekura associated with the blue jay. piyawa namoriwe.

blue jay. namoriwe.

to be afraid of the jaguar. purima ãhushi.

to be afraid. ãhushi.

to have the custom of sharing someone else's food. fnii ripou.

to arrange food on leaves placed on the ground at the time of distributing and consuming it. fni pakoheai.

to share food. fnii.

tobacco wad. pee nahe humãi.

tobacco leaves prepared with ash, folded and pressed in the hand to form a wad. humãi.

the hekura watch over the path, and each time I make them desist. hekura re peni yo nohi wãri ha thapoheni, pei ya pe wãri kuyeataramai.

foreseeing the children's hunger I planted so many cambures rokomi that the overly abundant fruits are spoiling. pei ke ya pe ohi nohi ha thaponi, hei ihiru ke pe rokomipi wãrimou re kupe.

to watch over, take care of (a child, sick person, elderly person, etc.); to suspect or think something about someone. thapoheni.

daughter-in-law (wife of son, sister. yuhapi.

extend your hand (for me to give you something). imiki ta totoiku.

to extend the arm to grab something; to offer, present (to give). totoai.

to install one. pehithemou.

Frog arched its back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to walk arching one. hiketeaprarou.

the dog caused the division of the herd of tapirs into two unequal groups. hiimani ware ke ki tihetirema.

causing a division into two unequal groups. hakaproduciendo.

I took the fish out of the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

to take out several objects from a canoe. hashiramai.

they removed the perforated body of the man (= they removed from the belly of the monster rahara the body of the man perforated with spears). yãnomãmi ke the tirosha no ukeremahe.

they removed the perforated body. ukeremahe.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. yaweremi.

go then to dry your arrows at the place where we discovered a small stream long ago. mihi ai pe u poko re reoperei ha, iha a mi ta hahe she.

we discovered. reoperei.

hacer girar los. rakirakimo.

to be dark, to have a dark complexion. pitiripi.

The path is starting to get muddy. yoka ãhiãi : el camino comienza a estar embarrado.

to get muddy. ãhiãi.

I trace a line with onoto over my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to paint a curved line from one ear to the other passing over the forehead, to be painted in that way. tiwaroo.

lying. echado.

brown-crested flycatcher. niyosirimi.

they fled to the forest. urihi hami pe tokurayoma.

the otter escaped immediately. proro ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to flee, to escape. tokuu.

following Woman-palm the songs come this way. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

Woman-palm. Mujer-palma.

in ancient times the people of the white-backed grackles were the owners of the light-colored pijiguao birds. ãyãkorãri mope herasi re auwei mopeni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe.

species of thomoro tree, its bark is lighter than the previous one (lit. thomoro a re auwei.

white, light-colored. auwei.

the shamans had cold. okã pe wahaturayoma.

they had cold. wahaturayoma.

they fled one after another. the pe rereokema.

they fled one after another. rereokema.

to paint dots (durative). tipikou.

I am afraid. mãyãhãri umo.

to be afraid. mãyãhãri.

to help someone free themselves from being restrained. hukepramai.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to have accompanied (a food with another). tehiarei.

to hide an object behind another. shãhoprou.

to strip off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree (perfective durative). pahathorei.

the man is angry. mamo kasi yakokorimi.

to be angry. yakokorimi.

something prohibited. paprawe.

to make tobacco pungent by preparing it properly. nakiprai.

to do it in order to give it away. wahathokei.

I let a picure escape into the vegetation. thomi ya he omarema.

to escape, to disappear into the vegetation. he oai.

to cut in a circular manner, remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimonenekei.

he remained pressed down under it for a long time. a hikitao heatima.

to remain pressed down under an object for a long time. hikitao.

headdress of the hekura with the appearance of a specter. watoshe pore.

why do they always speak ill of me. weti ke the ha yare wãhã shiro wayoamai.

to criticize someone, to speak ill of someone. wayoamai.

the pulp of the true yuca is tender, while this one is really tough. nahi si yai re kui, pe te hi pe epehewe, hei te pe pata hiyakawe.

to be strong (a person), to be hard, firm, tough, rigid. hiyakawe.

fruits of the kãrã ãshi tree. ãshihiki.

he deposited the termite nest on the ground and broke it open with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

to open by tearing, to tear the wrapping of a package with the fingers; to break with the hand (perfective form, sense 1: to do this in order to offer). hureshekei.

to receive a stolen object. thomipei.

To drag or pull an object along the ground. shaimapou.

he woke up at daybreak. the haruu uheheprou tehe a rãrãyoma.

he woke up. rãrãyoma.

Baba and his wife had the custom of going alone to the forest to cook their packages of caterpillars on the coals. iwariwe sho, pe suwepi sho, uruﬁ hami kasha ke pe hãro yaatii re ayaowei.

also, equally, with; in company of; it also has a coordinating function. ayaowei.

you will make the banana burn. kuratha wa ishimarei.

to burn. quemar.

to have a slip of the tongue, to use one word for another. hãroprou.

she realized that she only had coal in her hand. oshohore wa ki mãopou ta no hoopereshini.

she realized. hoopereshini.

to have gray hair (durative). irepii.

Do you have a child. wa ihirupi kua kure.

Child, come. ihiru, hapo.

child. ihiru.

Siroromi arrived again, this time carrying two paujíes on his back. siroromi ke a koã kopema, mãrãshi ke kipi parekea piyepema.

carrying on the back. piyepema.

they pursued me in vain in this place, they tensed their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

tensed (a bow). iyohorei.

to dry out. shirikiai.

to deepen the interior of an object, to make a cavity deeper. koeheai.

to build a footbridge to cross a stream. ihirãmorayou.

brusquely, he put his hand on the inclined leaves. enaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to peel the grains of yopo, to scratch oneself, to place one. iprushiai.

insect, tree. ãshih.

brother-in-law, behave well, you are not sitting properly. shoriwe a ta totihiparu she, wa rea toami yaiwe.

to be in a bad position; to live in poor conditions (often due to laziness or incompetence). toami.

since they did not want to desist, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to desist, to give up. tiraprarai.

to become vertical. wapo.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe transformed. wãtetetaruni, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei (mit.

to have become narrow/closed (perfective aspect). wãteterayou.

the turtle was approaching, moving in an oscillating manner. poshotomi ke a wai paroparomoimama.

to move in an oscillating, swaying manner, like turtles. paroparomo.

1. To bend, to fold (the edge or tip of a tool). 2. To draw up the legs, to draw up the legs in front of the genitals, out of modesty, when sitting on the ground (a woman). 3. To bend, to fold (once on itself) the edge of something, to make a hem on a fabric.. koheã.

to remain seated in a hammock for a long time. tipetaai.

sister, come closer. amiye, wa ha aheteikiyoni.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

to approach, to get close. etei.

to enlarge, to expand the surface of a dwelling or garden plot. hauhumap.

converge, head towards. puhura.

to remain seated on the ground for a moment. tirereprao.

and it matures during the dry season, between January and February and also it can be The word 'madurar' in Yanomami means 'to ripen, to mature'. y que madura durante la estación seca, entre enero y febrero.

to let (something) ripen. ete-ma-i.

mature, ripen. madurar.

my fireplace is next to an exit. ipa yãno nanokaa.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. nanoka.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). yeteke.

the one who (performs such and such action). Tie-.

even though you have a reputation for being capable of killing (we are capable of defending ourselves). wamaki puhi no hoã asimopimi.

to kill without hesitation. asimopimi.

to not stay in one place (funny or joking). wetihou.

to prune, to cut branches. payoai.

type of bamboo point. shinaki.

spider. wariomi.

to put a puhi. tikroho.

the snake eggs are agglutinated (they form clusters). oru ke ki nathe shimokore.

1. To become abundant, form abundant clusters or bunches of fruits. 2. To agglutinate, form clumps. 3. To swell slightly (like the skin after an insect bite). shimokoreãi.

to cook over a flame (perfective). frãrãrãkei.

downstream, in the conuco, there are really only two short bunches of plantains. porakapi kuratha ke kipi wai onohowe yaua totihia kupiyekiri.

short, brief; briefly, to do something for a short time. onohowe.

to hesitate, to vacillate. rãikikiãi.

to renounce. ãkiki.

they transformed, I looked and saw that they were directing their bamboo-tipped arrows towards us. pe ihamamo shatiprakema, rahaka re pe ki re puhuruoperei.

they transformed. ihamamo.

The new sprout has grown. Puhutu prou wakexi.

new sprout, new branch. puhutu.

latex of the rubber tree; rubber, elastic (neologism). husuhusu.

to be completely rolled up in a spiral, to be folded over itself several times. yapurewe.

to become lukewarm. pothothoai.

I'm going to break a dry branch (hitting it against the ground). koã ya ãhusi wãri ta yahekia.

dry branch. koã ãhusi.

the knot of the bowstring slid off its fastening point (and came loose). pe nahitha moroshi ikukuprariyoma.

to slide off, to come loose (of a knot or fastening). ikukuprariyoma.

vine; Wulffia baccata (Asteraceae) (lit.: turtle foot). baccata.

a flame that extinguishes and reignites repeatedly. aketou.

it is your arrow. sherekahe ke a.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

stay sleeping while they make love with your wife. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo (mit.

your (singular). nomahe.

to be having someone paint a curved line on one. hiporoshimamou.

an enormous anaconda was rising on its back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei (mit.

lower back muscles, back. mapuukapi.

they danced and did funny things, but Baba did not make them smile. the pe iriamoma, iwariwe ke the kasi wateprou mai.

to make someone smile. wateprou.

to act brave, puffing out one. akehe.

the oroweshi flowers gave off a strong smell and also it can be The word 'rukei' in Yanomami means 'to enter, to penetrate'. oroweshi ke ki ni kreteri rukei ha kuparuni.

I usually get into (the trunks of trees) to eat honey. kamiye pei ke ya ha rukeoproherini, puu ya u pe waaprai tharei.

to give off a strong smell. rukei.

force someone to give something. kanaãi.

to have a concave mark. wãhihiã.

they started to groan one after another. pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

they offer me fish one after another. yuri pe ha ware a topei notiatarouhe.

to do something one after another, to do something in succession. notiatarou.

to have white spots on the body (caused by a fungus). yoapiprou.

to lie down or be lying down. makeo.

1. to move blindly, 2. to blind. hosisi.

Noise produced by. tootoomo.

the raparimi fruits fall one after another (when ripe). raparimi pe prerei siihehewe.

to fall one after another. prere.

excrement. orãmi*.

that which can be. yatikamou.

(here is) a tobacco wad, a recently prepared tobacco wad. pee nahe tute, pee ke nahe tute totihiwe.

a recently prepared tobacco wad. totihiwe.

to allow a young woman to leave the space where she was confined after her first menstruation. shopohoprai.

the region where I have lived in other times. fipa hiki.

in another region and also it can be The word 'hiki' in Yanomami means 'to grate'. fshomi ke the hiki ha.

region. hiki.

the wasps sting us, they release their arrows. kopinani yamareki tikararei, shereka pe huheamakei.

they release their arrows. huheamakei.

bow that lacks rigidity. fhãto nahi prehepi.

soft (certain substances, certain fruits). prehepi.

a heavy load that exerts strong traction on a carrying strap (pulling it down). fhute ihohoo.

1. A heavy load that exerts strong traction on a carrying strap (pulling it down). 2. To hang upside down, like a sloth or a spider from its web.. ihohoo.

to interpose (changing place) to protect someone. reaprarou.

to knead the cassava flour so that some liquid remains inside it. urererei.

I descended the other slope. ya mohe hotepariyoma.

to descend a slope. hotepariyo.

to be completely damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekehewe.

(related to pee nahe kare). pee nahe hopou.

faint sound of an engine. motoro ke ãmomiã.

the noise of the blows that Cachicamo struck with his stone axe was heard so faintly as if they had been near Warakuawe (very far from the place of utterance). hei warakuawe theri pe re perirati naha moro re poopi ãmomiã kuoma (mit.

faint noise, barely perceptible sound; echo. ãmomiã.

to pile up (fruits). porororariyo.

what can be cut into pieces. tipuramou.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to get bruised. hãepotopiprou.

I will return (here). ya huu kooimap e.

I shot (an arrow) at the anteater just as it was coming towards me. tepe ha huimai tehe ya niyaprarema.

I go in that direction chasing the little birds. heyemi kirithami ya pe nosi pou kuimati.

here the day comes again. pe the haruu koã a re kuim i.

to go in a direction (upstream or downstream). kooimap.

to form a (or several) blister(s) on the hand. fimiki si posho.

to have a blister. si poshoa.

the bark of the ayukuma tree peels off easily. ayukuma a si poshowe.

to have a blister. poshoa.

to get hurt (cut, scratch, gash), to make or have a long mark. yakekeo.

(esp. bocón). pokou.

to be afraid. wiiwiimi.

to scream in pain. hiyohiyomou.

to clean or polish completely. shutukaherei.

He deposited the termite nest on the ground and broke it open with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

1. To open by tearing, rip the wrapping of a package with the fingers; break with the hand. 2. To hollow out the earth by scratching with the fingers. huresha.

don't look at me eating this, don't let them see me eat so they don't get sick. ai he, ware maikaprarihe: no me miren comer, no ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

embers. ãshoku.

Mujer-picure paró bruscamente (de correr) en las fuentes del río Kootopiwei. kootopiwei u heki ha thomiriyoma ke a hothoprakekirioma.

Name of a river. Kootopiwei.

he conversed in a low voice. a wã wãhãniniwe wayoma.

to speak softly (after having spoken normally), to be soft after having been loud (noise). wãhãninitou.

he immediately made the call to the hekura (and said): "I make my dog come back to life". a tutomou shoaoma: "ipa yaro ya horiprai ta kuparu" (mit.

call made to the hekura at the beginning of a shamanic session; call made to the hekura by a shaman who has just been initiated. tutomou.

then you have to place several logs on top. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

to lie on top of one another, to be sick and lie on one object then another. makekou.

the people of río arriba use such narrow guayucos that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

to be straddled, to straddle. yakaro.

"sigue a los demás", me dijo. "a ta nohãthoyo", yare nowã thama.

follow. nohãthoyo.

we did not take any women, all were ugly. suwe yama pe toanomi, pe wãritiwe haikiwe ha.

they had gathered all the poles (that they needed for building the collective house) in the central plaza. the pe hãto nahi hiraa haikipemahe.

all, everything, completely. haikiwe.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed by falling to the ground (a single object). tikuh.

to tie firmly, to fix firmly. rohothoprai.

cut the vine. thoo ya thotho peprarema.

picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

cut, finished cutting. peprarema.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or cambures so that they ripen). uticon.

he went anyway, even though he was told not to do anything about it. the pe ma wasii tehe, a hua he yatirayoma.

to insist on doing something despite being told not to, to do something stubbornly. wasii.

to rot, to decompose in a specific place. ruthakei.

object whose edge has been folded several times over itself. koheprawe.

(no translation provided). shirãkomi ãmosi henaki.

Heliconia revoluta and Heliconia hirsuta, bijao (Heliconiaceae). shirãkomi.

Lagarto quickly broke the beehive into pieces, let them fall, and slid down the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to let fall, to drop. kemari.

since my shoulder didn't hurt, I took the opportunity to bring all the necessary sticks/rods (for construction). ya hako niniprou mai ha ya the hiki ma re oa waikimarihe.

to bring all the necessary sticks/rods (for construction). waikimarihe.

while carrying the rock, he was listening and staying on the lookout. maa ma yehiporani, yimika taataroma.

we went down the slope rolling with arrows in hand. shereka yama pe porani yamaki nihoropraakirioma.

he lay in a cotton hammock and looked around. yii ke ki ha a perirani the pe mii piyekou.

indicates that two actions or events occur jointly; can often be translated as . yehiporani.

one cannot detect the enemies in ambush when walking at the head. pari hami yãnomãmi pe the pe tapraimi ke pe no tharaheshi.

to detect enemies in ambush. tharaheshi.

the pain prevented him from moving. no wãri kiwema mai.

to prevent from moving. kiwema.

to close. raai.

tuqueque; Thecadactylus rapicauda (Gekkonidae). sheshehari.

to be wrinkled or creased locally. wãhi.

to smell of fish; the smell of a woman who has just given birth. itimori.

to pile up, to accumulate. heruyutumai.

to speak in a low voice, to emit a weak sound. wãhãninirayou.

I approached the place where the gallineta was singing. hãshimo ya wã ahetemakema.

approached, drew near. ahetemakei.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to divide something into pieces by pulling it with the teeth in one direction and with the fingers in the other, for oneself. wakokorei.

he suddenly appeared in the dwelling. yahi hami a shirimoma.

dwelling, house, home. shirimoma.

to divide into two parts, to split in two. pashihiprai.

to become short. homotoai.

to be hungry. nohã.

they coat all threads and cords used for tying with the sticky substance from the mai kohi tree, in order to fix them. pei ya orãmisiki hami rifuma a mai koshi.

a sticky substance made from the resin of the mai kohi tree. orãmisiki.

the plantains were exhausted and they went to camp in the forest. kuratha e rii ha mrarini wãyumi pe ayoma.

to disappear, to be exhausted. mrarini.

go to the forest (to hunt), you will grow up soon. urihi hami ke wa ha huaani, a ta yawea hairi.

to work; to hunt. huaani.

we are in the company of people who are not from our community, but we are the ones who tie the arrow canes in the middle (that we just collected, to transport them). kamiye yamaki re heshihiomopotayouwei, shereka ke yama peishoku pata re thaamaperei.

to be in the company of people from other communities. heshi.

they discovered the path to the village. shama ke a pata kopehewe praa re tarareiwehei (mit.

to discover. tarareiwehei.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall seriously ill. parohoprou.

the shamans go to kill (in another community). hekura pe imimou.

to take possession of something without being seen. imimou.

After having climbed up the trunk, Toucan slid down. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down from a tree trunk. torereapraroni.

to kill many animals during a hunt. yohumoray.

we used to pass by here when we went to harvest plantains. eyemi re yamaki ha kupraani, kuratha yama pe tepraai.

there, downstream, is the place where they have the habit of fishing. kihi koro totihi ha, yuri pe re kãprããi totihiowehei ha.

to have the habit of doing something in the same place. kupraani.

they had hung their hammocks outdoors. hakokopramorayou.

Tocar, acariciar (por afecto, en señal de amistad). hurikayou.

I place the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

1. To place a deep container on the ground; to offer food that is inside a deep container. 2. To get into the water, to be in the water.. ithoo.

to divert the rain. hãimãi.

pulled the liana gently several times. pe thotho ikoikomoma.

pulled gently several times. ikoikomoma.

to gather the arms over the chest or hold them along the body (when feeling cold); to raise the front legs in a threatening stance (a venomous spider). yokoko.

he hung the hammock up high again. isi ha pe ki hirihiã ha koikuni.

to hang a hammock. hirihikei.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to reflect, to ponder. yekeri.

he was in his hammock and swinging with his foot while whistling. estaba en su chinchorro y se balanceaba con el pie mientras silbaba.

swinging. balanceaba.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to produce spasmodically (referring to bubbles rising to the surface of water). poririporirimou.

to trace the lines described earlier on someone. hukekeai.

to start to surpass (in height). torehou.

to help. thãrimi.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long extended line. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

to stretch out in a line, to extend. tutu.

the woman's breasts were erect and firm, she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. suwe hãkãmiki ha sherereikuni, suwe ke a yokoapraroma.

to have erect and firm breasts. shererewe.

it is crowded with noises, voices. wã hithokãi.

to be crowded, to be packed (a place). hithokãi.

send your mother there to harvest corn, there where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to pass over water (long object, branch). shorokou.

the fire is slowly going out. koa wake wãnonãi.

to slowly extinguish, to gradually go out (a fire). wãnonãi.

to crack in several places. nashoprou.

you do not truly know how to express yourself (by participating correctly in exchanges), you do not return the value of the goods you receive (lit. wa aka hayuomi yai, imi no wãi prahaimi yai.

to return the value of goods received (lit.: the goods you give do not go far). prahaimi.

gizzard. koyopi.

Frog arched its back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch one. hikete.

don't start fighting with clubs again. naprushi peni a hore sheyou kopokirihe.

to start fighting with clubs. kopokirihe.

to shout when one is in a dangerous situation, to ask for help. irãrãmorãyou.

(he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). he ishokore.

(he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). ishokore.

I have the habit of eating honey. puu ya u pe waaprai tharei.

to eat. wari.

we fished upstream from where the Karesisiwe River flows into (another river). karesisiwe u re papohori ha pemaki yuri kããma.

name of a river. Karesisiwe.

to hunt. waiki.

as Mount Maiyo disappeared little by little under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear completely under water. shototokei.

null. rikirikimi.

it was the spotted-bodied váquiros like the tokori tree leaves that took possession of Sherekanawe. ware ke kini oni tokoripi hena raokowe ke kini sherekanawe a tereherima.

a type of tree with spotted leaves. tokoripi.

when you dream Mahariri it scares you (= it gives you nightmares). wa maharimou tehe maharirini wa puhi ahimari.

to dream constantly. kurama.

to become concave on the outside (terminative aspect). wapokoprou.

they will see what will happen, said those who knew. the no ta tarehe, ihi re, the pe kuma the pe re taowei.

they will see. tarehe.

I see the forest. Uu koshi pei.

belongs to the taxonomic system of animals. koshi.

(speaks of upriver). kahu upe kreshe.

he went to meet Siroromi, grabbed him and threw him into the fire. siroromi re a yãkão mi ha paoni koa wake ha a sheyepema.

fire, flame; firebrand. roromo.

to bite a food while sucking at the same time to absorb the juice or pulp. wateteai.

brother-in-law, they will be unable to endure that. s h ori pe the pe puhi rohothomapou taomi.

to be impassive, stoic (in relation to pain, danger); not to show one. rohothoo.

to be locally bright, white or clean. shutukahea.

ay, the woman was so afraid that she kept running from one side to the other. suwe ke a kiriri ruaprarou ha tikoikuni.

to run from one side to the other. aro.

to have someone paint such a line on one's face. mi tiporemou.

line that joins one cheek to the other passing over the forehead. tipore.

to cause disappointment to someone (by refusing to give them something). pepramai.

to be about to request help. eripramou.

(he) lives in a place where no 'White' person lives. peria re mare hami a yahi re ithãprai.

to get up from the hammock to make room for a guest; to place several containers on the ground; to plant several objects vertically in the ground. ithãprai.

to be about to have oneself painted with crossed lines on the body. yãhiripramorãyou.

you keep quiet. wãno ke pe hiriaprai ha.

to be silent, to keep quiet. hiriaprai.

tibia. furokopi.

the son of Jaguar was mute. ira ihirupi e aka porepi re kuonowei.

the one who was beautiful was called Kuyarowe (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). katehe a re kuonowei, kuyarowe a wãhã kuoma.

to be mute; to be unable to participate in ceremonial dialogues; to not know the Yanomami language; to speak badly (for a small child); to give objects without receiving anything in return. kuonowei.

in the eyes, where the worms climbed, termites swarm (there). pei the mamo Zool.

to swarm, to teem. rãirãipraro.

to place at the base of, to put underneath, to bring down. kotheai.

the ancestors transformed into sloths. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

transformed into sloths. ihamarariyo.

at the foot of the arrow canes of the Yawari passes the path of the jaguar people. yawari pe sherekapi si koro hami irari pe no mãyo pata re wãkirãkiri (cha.

path of the jaguar people. wãkirãkiri.

that one that I call "the bearded one" looked like his younger brother. hirapore, ki naha pe f eeshe ke e kuoma.

spider weaver (numerous species). hirapore.

edible frog; Leptodactylus pentadactylus (Leptodactylidae). Lives in deep underground galleries; almost always hunted by women.. fãsipi.

I will hunt, we (you and I) will eat game (lit. yaro ke ya niyãprai pehe a wape.

to shoot an arrow at a target, to kill with an arrow or gunshot. yãprai.

to approach one another to confront in combat. tisuayou.

in a place where the ground was bulging, there were manaka palm trees. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha manaka si pe kuoma.

convex, rounded, bulging. yepihi.

you will be caught by a jaguar. irani ke wa huweretu.

to be caught/captured. huweretu.

at dawn he killed a tapir. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema.

at dawn, early morning. henararema.

not to fear exposing oneself to arrows, to face someone with the challenge of fulfilling a threat (of shooting an arrow at the speaker). niyãprãmorãyou.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (he has no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to go on a visit to another community. hamamouwei.

the nutria escaped immediately. ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to escape, to flee. tokuni.

to break into several pieces. wetirariyo.

upriver speech. oponi.

to get distracted, to let one. mohotutou.

there they form a numerous group. kiha pe nanoka ithãthã kurahari.

to be very numerous, to be grouped in large numbers. ithãthã.

to be about to have oneself painted with crossed lines on the body by someone. yãhiripramou.

to harass. wetirei.

to communicate news. yimikamai.

volvió a trepar e inició la última parte de su ascenso [peshekuprou, term. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

volvió a trepar e inició la última parte de su ascenso. koonowei.

to tremble, vibrate superficially (like a gelatinous material when impacted or shaken laterally), to perform a gentle oscillating or vibrating motion (like a spider web trembling in the wind). riiriimorãyou.

the man had just become initiated as a shaman, he arrived near termites that were standing, with their heads covered with white down. yãnomãmi thaamamo no tute ke the, osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

to become initiated as a shaman. thaamamou.

Once burned, its ashes are used to prepare a condiment. nta).

a plant. nta.

(Rabipelado le lanzó) un dardo (envenenado) que rebotó sobre su garganta. pei re orãmisi hami e masi mãiã re nokamareiwei.

a poisoned dart. orãmisi.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

lie down next to me. a ta yakaiku.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock. yaka.

to have passed over the fire (perfective durative). shãkunaye shãishãirei.

snake. Clelia.

they constructed a scaffolding around (the rock). the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

to perforate, to make a hole. shokei.

he has the intention of coming to attack me with magic plants, that one with the eyes mottled with dots. ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei, mamo pe wãri re tipikiini.

mottled, speckled, decorated with dots. tipikiini.

he slipped at the moment he was passing over (the fallen tree). a wãri rerekou tehe a kaherayoma.

to pass over by striding. rereke.

character of mythology (lit.: head of picure). thomihewe.

they hurried to defecate and return. yetu the pe shi ha keyeikuni, yetu re the pe ukua kokei.

to defecate, to go to war. keyeikuni.

to boil vigorously. krothakrothamou.

capture the termite soldiers of the oshe aka species by introducing a twig into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). foshe aka hishãi.

to make a child sick by not respecting the sexual prohibitions during the breastfeeding period. foshe wãriãi.

termite soldier of the oshe aka species. foshe.

embrace the tree tightly with your feet. mamiki ta waporoa ta totihiparu.

embracing the tree trunk with the feet. waporokei.

I let it escape. ya nohi mohotumarema.

to lose sight of, to let an animal or enemy escape. nohi mohotuamai.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

to take an object without looking at the person, to have the eyes turned or blank. nohoã.

to throw multiple objects one after another, to give objects to someone by throwing them. sheyehai.

Quickly Tuqueque broke the beehive, let the pieces fall, then slid down the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to harvest honey by breaking the beehive into pieces. fpuu poprai o oi poprai.

to break, cut into pieces (a beehive). poprarini.

it is fluid. the hereshi.

it is light blue. the ushi hereshi.

fluid, liquefied. hereshii.

in all the points of the trees against which he had rubbed his bloodied penis, transverse stains were seen. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to clean, wipe, erase, soil completely. hãhitarei.

sinuous, having many meanders (streams of water). shãkoko.

food chewed that is given to a baby. mahekoto theriyoma a thehi.

baby. nihoã.

to be scratched, to be hurt. yaheprou.

upstream. krake.

to bite, to chew slowly (the tip of a long and resistant object to break it). weniki.

I observed that they left the plantains to spoil. kuratha pe ki wãrimomarema ke a sihei.

they left the plantains to spoil. wãrimomarema.

he gathered worms in a place where rocks rise up. maa ke mape hothothopramope ha kohoromi shipe torarema.

place where rocks rise up. hothothopramope.

knife fish. waho.

to be about to go and have oneself painted. hahetipramou.

they attached bamboo tips to their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

let's attach branches with forks to the tips of our arrows (for hunting small birds). rãhãrã pema pe ta hiima.

to attach a point or tip (to an arrow, stick, etc.). hiihai.

we slept until dawn, and then descended the mountain. yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descend by a slope. timiparekirio.

small bananas. kuratha naki.

small. naki.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

dominate by size, be bigger than. morokoprawe.

he painted ugly circles on his body in a hurry. wãritiwe a oni pata roherohemoma.

he painted ugly circles on his body in a hurry. roherohemoma.

desplácense en ﬁla (y silenciosamente), como los chácharos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to align, to line up. shani-.

term. aushiprou.

supernatural malefic beings instantly opened his chest. yai theni pariki pakekeprai nokarayoma.

I responded immediately to their shots, they were heard groaning. ya pe niyaprai nokarayoma, pe rããmorãy o m a.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to occur immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. nokarayoma.

Yotenamariwe se dirigió con paso rápido hacia su madriguera. pei pe pekapi ha yotenamariwe ke a pata rahurahua ha yaiikiyoni.

madriguera, cubil, cueva. yaiikiyoni.

I am the Spider Spirit hanging upside down (on the web). hãhãrãmãethawe ya ihohoa kuyahi (cha.

In the center (of the web), where it is dense, the Spider Spirit was curled up. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

Spider Spirit. hãhãrãmãethawe.

to graze repeatedly a target. tihehai.

to be dizzy. shiweshiwemi.

to place oneself in the center. tharirayou.

la gente de río arriba usa guayucos tan estrechos que los testículos les sobresalen por ambos lados. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

estar ubicado a ambos lados de. yakaroprawe.

To have such or such an aspect. tapramorayou.

sugarcane. yaraka usi.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied at different heights. mi wereheo.

to become unbalanced or tilted (e.g. a canoe). werehai.

you will go to ask for arrows from one hearth to another. shereka wa pe nakai mi athope.

to go from hearth to hearth, to make the rounds of the central plaza going from one hearth to another. athomarei.

to flatten, to level. resisi.

to make small, to diminish. wakewemi.

to approach for a moment, to approach briefly. ikutou.

you are the one who has forced them to walk quickly. kaheni ke wa pe wãri hore ha hushushuponi.

to force to walk quickly. hushushuponi.

(habla de río arriba). fitho.

my in-law (before marriage alliance). aipewe.

The Yanomami think that all harpy eagles. Los Yãnomãmi piensan que todas las arpyjaa.

harpy eagle. harpyjaa.

repair. arre-.

it is slightly shiny. the wãisipi mimou tapihiwe.

to be slightly greasy/shiny. tapihi.

he was not aware at all of what was happening and thought he was at home. a puhi hatukewemi ma kui, hawe kama theri pe rihami a huu kuo petaoma.

to be aware, to realize lucidly a situation. puhi hatukewe.

to repair, to fix. toprai.

grew (plants, in the garden); plural object. patarayou.

I do not eat. ya iyaimi.

I will not kill fish. yuri ya pe sheimi.

not. imi.

in the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants sprouted spontaneously. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to sprout, to grow spontaneously. urerou.

to defend (someone) speaking. wã no huai.

crimson dye from the Crimson Fruitcrow, when applied to the body it makes one resemble the bird. kuhararomi nouku.

Crimson Fruitcrow (bird species). kuhararomi.

to have a swollen belly. hihathomai.

to stay for a long time in a hammock hung below another one. pehithetao.

they are the ones who hit you and him/her. kama peni wahereki sheremah e.

you and him/her (dual object pronoun). sheremah.

to deform the edge of a tool by hitting it against hard objects. shokekeamai.

one and the other sat and ate the fish. ke kipi re rokeiwei, yuri ke ki re wapiarareiwei.

they sat. rokeiwei.

to get one's hair combed. miki yakekamou.

to delouse oneself with a comb. noma pe yakekeo.

to get one. yakekamou.

to remove, undo, take off. ukuku.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to move along a summit (of a mountain, hill). pororai.

to swirl (water, wind). shimoreshimoremou.

not to be locally cleared or bare (ground). noshi tãihiã.

to loosen, to untie, to let escape. oa.

some (people) arrived to join us. e naha kupire pe warokeyoruma.

he came to the place where I was standing. ya upraope ha a warokeyoruma.

came to join us, arrived to be with us. warokeyoruma.

the tobacco is becoming moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to become moldy in a place. rohorokei.

(he/she) hung a hook. fmãu ishakokei.

to hang or suspend something flexible and elongated. ishakokei.

be silent at once. pe matha ta waitaru.

the child had become suddenly silent (underground). ihiru ke a matha re waitapariyonowei (mit.

the shamans who were healing in the house, became suddenly silent. the pe nohi re reayouwei, the matha waiprapei.

to become suddenly silent, to fall suddenly silent. waitaru.

climb up the trees firmly and harvest fruits (said of upriver). wafeki fa rofothoani, wafeki ni thao.

climb up the trees firmly and harvest fruits. rofothoani.

to arrive at someone. notikei.

to desand the path in a specific place. tatokei.

he has woken me up. yare hushurema.

to wake someone up. hushurema.

to tell someone to swim. karemaparei.

past tense suffix. moke.

bud, flower bud. huna.

the spotted-nosed cat. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

to be spotted or mottled locally. hayapishii.

in ancient times the people of the white-backed grackles were the owners of the light-colored pijiguao birds. ãyãkorãri mope herasi re auwei mopeni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe.

species of thomoro tree, its bark is lighter than the previous one (lit. thomoro a re auwei.

white, light-colored. auwei.

we will go towards you dancing (say the hekura spirits to the initiate). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye.

to go towards (someone) dancing. heaimi.

It nests in the hollows of the trunks. Anida en los huecos de los troncos.

nests. Anida.

Jaguar, hungry for meat, looked for it without finding it. ira a naikiripi taema ma kui, a tapranomi.

to act dominated by hunger for meat; to be a cannibal, an eater of animal flesh. naikiripi.

to have half-closed eyes, as someone who is sleepy; to have eyes slightly open to look surreptitiously. shukukuwe.

to distribute (to take for oneself). shekererei.

several small warts. simopiprou.

to peel (a fruit, bark of a root or tree). tiprokoprou.

(al caer) sobre las rocas punzantes, Danta (estalló) en muchos pedazos que se diseminaron. pei ke ma pe pata namo shirikiope hami shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma (mit.

fragment, piece, part. akatahu.

to scratch oneself repeatedly. tikeketaai.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

to become sugary, to sugar. kretetiai.

fell one after another (fruits). shithãrayou.

why did he throw away the things. weti the nowã ha matohi a hoyarema.

threw away. hoyarema.

I will not separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I will go downstream to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

I will go downstream to build a new house (lit.: I will make the poles of the new dwelling clash with each other). teeteemokiriowe.

she, a woman; she repeats incessantly: "peshi e, peshi e. cha. ", thus expressing her carnal desire. , hekura del sexo femenino; ella repite sin cesar: "peshi e, peshi e.

to awaken sexual desire. peshimorãyou.

to place oneself very close to, to stick to. pakiikei.

Give me the hayakoari plant, when I inhale it, when I am under its effect, I will see in the distance the dwelling of the war demons that are always fighting each other. hayakoari ke hena, henaki ta prapari, ihi ke henaki wayu ha ãiãmori pe re niyayope ya pe yãnopi he tharea.

to have a vision or dream while under the effect of hallucinogenic plants. tharea.

to fill a container up to the brim. hiekeamai.

shaken (plural objects). yaisirarei.

let's stay here (you and I). eyeha peheki ta kuo.

"leave her here (and abandon her)", the yawari will say (myth). "eyeha re a wãri ta huhea hairihe", yawari pe kuma (mit.

here, in this place (where the speaker is located). eyeha.

fear will make me turn my face away. ya kiriri mi huruprarou kukei.

to turn one. rakiprou.

upriver, there where there is a sandbank. mrakatahu a re prapohori ha.

upstream, upriver. prapohori.

to avoid an obstacle or a prohibited relative by going around it. hãrorãyou.

to cover the ground in various places (generally of ripe fruits). tikukuprawe.

in the hole of his earlobe he had inserted parrot tail feathers. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the shinaki huurema.

parrot. huurema.

to turn over a capsized canoe, to put it upright again. mi hatuprai.

to turn over, flip, invert. ehemi.

to incarnate a hekura, to behave like a hekura. payemou.

to be angry. kareshe.

to cram, pack tightly. hishikiamai.

he really could not wake up, he died in that place. a rãi toomi no kirii, iha a nomaa re shoapariyowei (mit.

not being able to fall asleep. toomi.

to start having a headache. heki yayuprou.

to start having a headache. yayuprou.

to have an infected eye. mamo ripupiai.

to have an eye that becomes infected. ripupiai.

to start doing something persistently or gradually. yãshiprai.

the ancestors were already hanging from the posts that support the base of the roof. poreri totahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waikiwe ha.

1. Post that supports the base of the roof at the back of a communal dwelling. 2. Name often given to women (because their hammocks are often installed at the back of the roof).. totahima.

palm tree with spiny trunk. moshohara henaki.

palm tree with spiny trunk; Yanomami remove the spines with nicotine and by squeezing. moshohara.

that is the reason why I do not want to be dead. yaro kahiki re keonowei the yãno pe si ahi nikerei.

dead. nikerei.

the corn cobs are short. yono mope torohewe.

to be short, to have an oblong shape. homoto.

I clearly heard in a dream the song of the raromi konaki birds. raromi konari ke kipi ã mahariri ha topraikukirini.

a type of bird, possibly a species of blackbird or grackle. raromi.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or due to a heavy load being carried). fhuu mi thorukuwe.

to bend, to curve, to fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. thorukai.

the Shãshãpiwei mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

to be painted or lined with vertical lines. sherororati.

to change topics constantly during a conversation, to talk about this and that. wã yaiatarou.

to be different from one another, to change topics constantly during a conversation, to talk about this and that. yaiatarou.

to be afraid. motaha.

fruit of the watupara mahi tree. It is a variety of the morã fruit, but larger. This fruit is edible and is harvested during the rainy season; before eating it, it is soaked in hot water to soften the pulp.. watupara.

now they are returning to the collective dwelling. hei tehe the pe shimoo koã kupiyei.

to gather; to return to live in the dwelling (after camping in the forest). shimoo.

I will descortezar the trees and collect the hallucinogen, I will pulverize it, pour it into a gourd and say (to my younger brother): "take this hanging gourd, it is for you". kamiyeni epena ke ya e pe re yoaiwei, ya e pe ha kopeaprani, ya e pe hishi ha thaprani: "pei ahe ki yaua kure".

to descortezar (strip bark from) trees and collect hallucinogenic powder. yoaiwei.

Õmawe perforated the ground with the tip of his bow. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama.

to pierce, to perforate. nahini.

I did not delay in walking bent over (because of the pain), and I staggered. yetu re ya haototou ha totihioni, ya wekekou kuaaherima.

1. To bend one. haototou.

to smell sour or acidic. ni nashiri.

to smell sour or acidic. nashir.

(he/she) did it in the dwelling. wã tetepei.

to do something in the dwelling (e.g. cry for a dead person, threaten repeatedly, fight and threaten). tetepei.

to sink, to crumble, to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihoai.

boa constrictor (Boidae). hetureriwe.

"of the 'white' women who make jokes, give me one of their belongings", you will say that. "ei yãwãriyoma pe re iriamope, weti ipa napeyoma ke a", wa re kutouwei.

to say something, to utter words. kutouwei.

los niños comen la pulpa de los cucuritos raspándola con los dientes. ihiru peni kareshi pe wãhehãihe.

to bite, to scrape with the incisors. wãkeke.

at the moment he turned his back, Rabipelado shot him with a blowgun dart with deadly substances. a humapi reprou tehe, protho.

1. (onom.) the sound made by a blowgun when blowing to launch a projectile or harmful substances at someone. 2. (verb transitive) to launch harmful substances by blowing through a blowgun. protho.

the tembladores gave me several electric shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador (electric eel). tihekirarei.

they prepared arrows. a thanomihe.

they prepared arrows. thanomihe.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). thethei.

to start walking or moving to the front for a while; to move to the front of a canoe for a while. oratou.

to speak of something else, especially when not wanting to comply with a request. fãro.

I place the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

to place a deep container on the ground; to offer food that is inside a deep container. ithomaparei.

"Try this, you two", said Toucan (myth). "kahe ke wahekini the ta wapepraapi", mayepirithawe a no wã thamahe.

try (you two). wapepraapi.

to be numb due to the effect of a magic substance. ya imiki puhi no tawemi.

to be numb, insensible (part of the body). puhi no ta.

I will fart in your face. pe mi horaprarei: te voy a echar un pedo en la cara.

I will fart in your face. mi horaprarei.

to draw, to paint a circle on someone or something. oni rohahaai.

to draw, to paint a circle on someone or something. rohahaai.

to be smooth locally. frakahaa.

to speak a language different from the local speech. kãhiã.

the sexually excited monkeys capuchins rejoiced. hoashiri ke pe peshiri puhi topraroma (mit.

sexually excited. topraroma.

the ones who live upriver returned there. ora hami the pe te kui the pe koo koreherayou.

the ones who live upriver returned there. koreherayou.

the snakes will move away (said when one does not want to leave too early in the morning). oru ke ki kasikope.

I'm not going to the forest, I'm not leaving the collective dwelling (to go live elsewhere). urihi hami ya huimi, ya kasiproimi.

to approach the edge, to go to the periphery. kasiai.

to become flaccid, to lose rigidity. koamou.

to get cured by a shaman. nohi reamou.

to get cured by a shaman. nohi reamou.

to have good luck during a search (for honey, hunting, etc.). wetiamai.

he hung the cambur shells. e siki re rukekenowei.

he hung. rukekenowei.

come here to fan the fire. koa wake ta yareyo.

I'm going to kill the agouti by putting smoke in its den. opo ya yareprai.

to fan the fire, to activate the fire using a flat object (a fan, a bellows, a lid, folded leaves, etc.); to asphyxiate an animal by introducing smoke into its den in this way. yarepei.

generic term. yorã.

arrow to which the feathering has been tied (synonym). shereka he okãma.

to pleat (durative, plural object). wãhimai.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to descend vertically. wahohou.

it had to pass a long time before the ground recovered its firmness, then they descended again. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma (mit.

to become firm, to straighten up (a baby); to recover strength after an illness, initiation, or after participating in the unokaimou ritual. hiyakaai.

he untied the hammock (that he was carrying on his back), and lay down. yii theki a ha kusherini a perioma.

he is lying in a cotton hammock. yii ke ki ha a peria kure.

hammock. kusherini.

he moved away a little in the forest. urihi hami the re payekepayekekeiwei.

to move away a little, to travel a certain distance. ekepayekekei.

to make (something) pivot or spin around itself describing many turns. fãmori.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to look behind, to turn an object 180 degrees, to invert the sides or ends. hemihi.

he is happy. reorima siki.

to be happy. reorima.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty of inhabitants (dwelling, camp). roroko.

those who were taking refuge (on the mountain, to escape the flood) brought ocumos near with poles to plant them. pe he re ruonowei peni, pe niya ha tiaheni, ohina pe rekamahe.

they brought near with poles. tiaheni.

to turn over a capsized canoe, to put it upright again. mi hatuprai.

to turn over, flip, invert. ehemi.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to experience persistent stomach pains, to have stomach pains regularly. yootho.

to be in shreds, to be torn apart, to be overcooked (meat or fish). kohihiwe.

to become a little deep. ayaraai.

in the moment when the tragavenado assigned names to the rocks, Mirewakariwe shot him in the eye with a poisoned dart. ma pe ãhã yuai tehe, mirewakariweni hetu keki mamo horapema (mit.

to assign a name, to designate. yuayou.

spotted, burned, in several parts. fpatihi.

the child was already stiff from death. kasheshewe ihiru ke a wãri kua waikirayoma.

to be installed in a too taut hammock and have, as a consequence, the body straight. kashesheo.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to hold or carry something above one. yarehai.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

let's go accompany the almonds with fruits. wapu a ha shosho pema mo tehiape (habla de río arriba.

to accompany food with another food. tehitehi.

I carry the basket. Ẽ sherere a kokori.

to carry. sherere.

Bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

to be slightly curved, to have a slightly curved shape; to be twisted (bow, arrow). parokowe.

to be about to have a curved line painted on one. hiporoshipramou.

patagrulla tree, Amphirrhox longifolia (Violaceae). wãshãmonama.

1. Assist a sick person by rubbing them. 2. Touch, caress (as a sign of affection, friendship). hurikai.

the fruits of the moriche turn slightly yellowish when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

have taken that color (fruit eteweshi). okoroshirayou.

the hair; the head of hair. hethãnãuku.

the spider monkey that I dreamed presages the arrival of someone. feyemi fãho a thapi wãri kukeyoruma.

spider monkey. feyemi.

what do his threats matter, he wastes his saliva in vain. aka ha hoprarini a wã tetea pea.

I imagine that he expresses himself badly (lit. aka moyepi ke the.

tongue. aka.

cave or shallow burrow. kotakaa.

to feel sick. yatheai.

I am the one who deflowered her. kamiyeni ya ka hiweherema.

to deflower, to devirgin. hiweherei.

to reflect. maamaamo.

I get paid (for my work). ya no ohote koãmãi.

The visitors no longer come because they don't give anything in return for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

to restore, reimburse, grant something in return or compensation, give an object in exchange for another. koãmãi.

when you see the enemy warriors you will feel stunned with terror. wayu wa pe taprai tehe wa ãmoku keprariyo.

feeling of horror, of terror; to be stunned. keaai.

the earth is smooth. mashitha a si kopehewe.

to smooth; to homogenize a liquid or cambur compote by reducing all solid parts. kopehamai.

I spend my time lying in the hammock. ya peritao.

I don't do anything, I spend my time sleeping. ya ohotamou mai, ya mitao tharei.

he stayed stuck for a long time. a hikitao heatima.

he had been crouching for a good while when Honey appeared. a wãri retao tehe yãmonãmãriwe a petariyoma.

to stay for a long time in a position or situation. totihionomi.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty out (of inhabitants). rorokorãyou.

kill the konakona ants with embers, striking firebrands against each other (in this example the pronoun wahe you two refers to a single person: it is a mother-in-law addressing her son-in-law). konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to scatter embers by striking firebrands against each other (to drive away and kill ants). yashishikei.

(it) falls and also it can be The word 'mi weya' in Yanomami means 'to speak (southern Orinoco dialect)'. mi weyaai.

to fall. mi weya.

to take a small amount. wãisipirei.

to tear a strip to give it away. makokokei.

to cut, tear a strip (in a fabric, for example). makoko.

(no clear translation provided). huke.

say that to deceive. wa nomohori ha kuni.

to invite someone pretending to be a friend in order to kill them; to lure someone into a trap, to invite people to a party in order to kill them and/or take their women. nomohorirei.

the Yanomami people. Yãnomãmi.

[he/she/it] became impatient. shi harirakei.

to be impatient. shi harirawe: estar impaciente.

to become impatient. shi harira.

¿tuviste miedo (hace un rato). wa re kiriraruhe.

you were afraid (a while ago). kiriraruhe.

to introduce by force (perfective, plural object). kiririakei.

he/she made something bend repeatedly. mi thorukamai.

to make something bend repeatedly. thorukamai.

to shake off once (e.g. shake hand or forearm to remove something). yomikirei.

to whiten, to become white. auai.

food that was stirred in that way. tikorema.

They say they took him then to a savanna. pirisi a hami a kãi hoã waroa mahikemahe.

1. A type of grass with broad leaves that grows in clumps on the savanna, and by extension, savanna. 2. A type of wild vegetation dominated by certain thorny plants and with many roots, indicating that the land is not suitable for agriculture.. pirisi.

cuando ustedes lanzan los demonios de la enfermedad (no wãri) en dirección a seres humanos, éstos convergen hacia ellos (para contaminarlos). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

converge. prukaoprou.

it took us a long time to climb the last part of the trail and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain. hesikakei.

to become wrinkled, flabby or soft (locally). wãpret.

lend me yours. ahe a ta mahipa.

this arrow is yours. ahe ke a shereka.

is that machete you're carrying on your back really yours. miha ahe sipara wa yehipou pea kure e.

you will carry yours. ahe ke wa yehipope.

grab your bow, it will serve you as a lance to kill the babillas. ahe re the hi ta tere, iwa ke wa pe tiwehape.

yours. mahipa.

perfective form. rããmomarei.

to grow, to develop a little (plant). tirerai.

as (the turtle) had its head sunk (in the shell), it observed it and turned it over several times. pei ke pe he wai taroa ha yairini, a mima, pe mi hatuatarama (mit.

to become deep, to dig deeply, to deepen a hole. taro.

to submerge an object. kapirosiai.

I removed the ocumos (from the boiled water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to remove, extract, take out. hikehe.

(funny): to place the feet pointing towards the fire to warm them. fmamisiki yehitao.

toenails; claws of the hind legs; claws of a bird of prey. fmamisiki.

we regrouped and threw ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to fall or slide into water, to dive, to throw oneself down a slope. nihoropariyo.

having been squeezed or pressed locally. ãhuhuã.

the wood creaks (it could break), polite warning that the one in front makes to the one following, when people are moving balancing on sticks or tree trunks, to cross puddles of water or rivers. fhi krimou.

to creak, to crunch. kimo.

when the speaker is at home during the day (to do something). wakaraprou.

to make crumble, to make collapse. hishishãi.

scorpion. uhutima.

to live alternately. peripaai.

to close the mouth, to have the mouth closed. sutio.

the women are over there, go make love with them. m ihami suwe pe huu ha kuti, wa ihirupi thaohe.

to make love (said by a man). thaohe.

to have a bad appearance; to be dirty with mud or ashes. toteshi.

to strike blows on top, to nail. pasuakei.

to make something bounce or rebound. mãiãmakei.

the Waika missed the bird of prey several times in a row. waika peni koikoimi ke a posi hore waaprai ta kuraheni.

to miss (a shot). kuraheni.

to wait for the death of an animal. nomamakei.

to have been about to go get oneself painted. hirikipramorayou.

tree. camaticaro.

Daughter, go to the shifting grounds, attract people so that you and your husband can gather pijiguaos for me. heãrohe sho rashaye ke ki ta yuapi: hija, valos terrenos movedizos, atrae a las personas hayan tú y tu marido a recoger pijiguaos para mí.

As they approached the sandy beach, the demon of the shifting grounds attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei (mit.

demonio maligno de la clase yai the asociado a oãsi, demonio de los terrenos movedizos. heãhãturiweni.

we climbed a small mountain and then changed slope. hehu a wai hami yamaki ha yãmothoni, yamaki mi rakipariyoma.

change of slope. rakipariyoma.

to carry a child on one. ãyorimapou.

let the tobacco grow well, above all do not put leaves from small white down plants to dry. isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai: deja que crezca bien el tabaco, sobre todo no pongas a secar hojas de matas demasiaoromashi.

small white down. demasiaoromashi.

to dry by heat of fire, to smoke. teteke.

while Danta was perched (on a branch), everyone started climbing. shamariwe ke a pata ha tikeparuhuruni, komi the pe tuoma.

to be gaining height while climbing. tupeherii.

I sit or I am seated (depending on context). ya roo.

to sit. roo.

bebí el agua apresuradamente, estaba caliente. u kotarema, u yopraoma.

apresuradamente. kotarema.

the mosquitoes do not let (one) sleep. ukushi peni the pe mipramaimi.

indicates impossibility. fprama.

then it transformed into a gray heron (myth) (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). pasho re e si kuprou piyerayoma (mit.

transformed. piyerayoma.

we came out of the water at the place where the path is, we walked for a while on flat ground, and then we sat down. yo re hashiriawei ha yamaki ha hashiriikini, yamaki he ha yariyaritaikini, yamaki rokei.

we came out of the water. hashiriawei.

to revive someone's breath, to bring someone back to life (lit. fmishiã ukei (cha. : to extract the breath). ).

to have a breath that precedes physical presence in a place (like birds). ukerehe.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or cambures so that they ripen). yaroramai.

give me gratuitously (= without giving anything in return) an arrow tip with curare. ipa no mai ha namo ta totopa.

arrow tip with curare. namoki.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (he has no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to go on a visit to another community. hamamorayou.

the abundant water accumulated where Thunder is (= in the sky). yãruriwe a re kure hami u pata paa shoaketayoma.

he went immediately to hang upside down from a solitary algarrobo tree. ãro yawerewe re kohi ha a mi werea shoaketayoma.

away, at a distance. shoaketayoma.

the enemy warriors shot them both with arrows. wayu peni ke kipi niyapraremahe.

they shot them with arrows. niyapraremahe.

it's about wanting to go hunting when it's pouring rain. maa ke pe ma pririrou tehe a rãmi huu ta totihio thare.

downpour. cántaros.

pe yesi: 3rd person possessive, his/her mother-in-law. pe yesi: 3ra. t e p eyoma pe yesi e kuoma: The anteater woman was already his mother-in-law. pers.

mother-in-law. mu-.

these ripe fruits are truly tasty. the wai wake wãnihitawe yai.

1. to become good (quality of an object), 2. to be of good quality, tasty. wãnihi.

to divide, distribute several objects. ekererarei.

He grabbed a liana, with which he bent the small tree, which ended up leaning against the large tree. thoo thotho a ha yãkãreni hii ke hi itutua ahetea ha totihikini.

to bend or fold objects by inclining or folding them. itutu.

he broke open an ant nest (konakona) with his hand. konakona pe pesi kerema.

I pulled up an ãtãri shrub, breaking it with my hand. ãtãri ya ãhi kerema.

I gather cassava roots (pulling them out with my hand). nashi ya koko keai.

to take/pick for oneself in that manner; to do this without delay. kerema.

gather here. eyeha pe ta hiraiku.

they have just gathered near here, on the summit. hesika ha ke pe hiraa ahetepeyoruu kuhe.

to gather, to assemble, to group together. hiraiku.

to be happy. nashinashirimi.

to bury stakes of a defensive palisade tightly together. hisinirei.

he grabbed the chácharo (a type of animal) from one side and the venado matacán (another animal) from the other side. pei roroku hami poshe a ha yeteikuni, ai a roroku hami preãri a yetemakema.

to grab or seize something from one side and the other. yeteikuni.

to make a sucking noise with the tongue to call someone. teketekemou.

to let oneself be caught in the rain. he maapii.

to let oneself be caught in the rain. maapii.

(he) has bulging eyes. mamoku homou.

to have bulging eyes. mamoku homo.

to step on, to leave a footprint. kãshikãi.

(he) shoots an arrow. ya ma niniweini re ya the ha ma.

to shoot an arrow. niniweini.

to be on the other side of an elevation. yaheria: encontrarse del otro lado de una elevación de terreno.

being on the other side. yaheria.

as you do not fear anything, you always go out. wa si no sãiyopiwei ke wa horeprarou ta kupiyeni.

to not fear anything. sãiyopiwei.

her older sister, who is there, if only we could live in neighboring houses. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

older female relative. amiyepi.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. iroroai.

to reach a medium size; to go from a large size to a medium size, to reduce in that way. proweheprou.

we went into the water a little downstream. y amaki ithoa korohokema.

a little downstream. korohokema.

Cook the cassava roots and give them to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to cook, to boil. tupani.

to have erect and firm breasts. fhãkãmiki shererewe.

to be erect, firm (referring to breasts). sherere.

to get up from the hammock to offer something to someone. ithoalguien.

to turn halfway, to turn 180 degrees (perfective aspect of the verb). ãhemirãyou.

they removed the leaves in which they had cooked the fish. yuri pe hãro mi hapei re kupeiwehei.

to untie, to open a package. mi hapeai.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted. oni frãihiwe totihitawe.

to have the body painted with transverse lines. yãmonãmãritransversales.

two women have just arrived at your house, and have sat there. ahe ke nahi ha suwe ke kipi roa katitipeherou kuhe.

they (two women) have gone to sit directly at your hearth. katitipeherou.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be damaged, to be crushed (end of a long object). thekehe.

to put hands on someone. mishiãki kahuu.

to put hands on. kahuu.

to call someone by making a sucking noise with the tongue. teketekemo.

The anteater lay on its back to sleep. hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

1. To lie on one. rekekeai.

rubber tree; Couma macrocarpa (Apocynaceae). chinchokãnimãri.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pę rę koyokaiwei, ya pę now thaa shoarei kurei.

people from another community. koyokaiwei.

to be locally damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekeheã.

blow me hallucinogen gently. opi the ta shuriripa.

to receive a dose of hallucinogen by blowing. shuriripei.

to twist the trunk, making a rotating movement. ãkoto.

his/her eyelids swelled. mamokaki warepiprou.

to swell (of the eyelids). warepiprou.

Rabipelado se levantó del chinchorro y se dirigió hacia las dos mujeres que lloraban al muerto. suwe re ke kipi puhi re hãkihihou hami nãro a hoketou re shoarayouwei.

dead. hãkihãi.

it seems that those who went on reconnaissance have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

to discover, to notice something in the jungle. waikikei.

they have blown horeprema at us, they have directed yarepiyekiri towards us. kiha horeprema ke pehiki wãri horashikei ma re kurohei, hei horeprema hiki ma re yarepiyekiri.

magic plant cultivated, guate; Maranta arundinacea (Marantaceae). Women pulverize it, deposit the powder in the palm of their hands and blow it against the adversaries of their community in the course of a battle, to provoke their flight. The powder can also be spread over the footprints of enemy warriors, to weaken them and cause them leg pain; delayed in this way, the enemies can be reached and attacked.. yarepiyekiri.

Justicia sp. hayakoari henaki.

plant. henaki.

to spread gossip, to spread lies. wãnomou.

that was the whistling call of one of ours. kamiye ke pemaki husho wã kuo kuhe: ése era el silbido de llamada de uno de los nuestros.

whistling. ce.

I made him sick far from his home (using a magic plant). fya the totoprai re marayoi.

to make (someone) sick. totoprai.

to call someone by whistling (in the indicated manner); to communicate with someone through the whistled language. heãmorayou.

that causes nausea. the pariki shi harihamai.

to cause numbness or nausea (perfective form). harihimarei.

plant/animal classifier. sunama akasi.

classifier. sunama.

to receive something on the head. he shepariyo.

to receive something on the head. shepariyo.

convertirse en mal tirador (después de haber sido hábil en el pasado). simaprou.

do not come visiting with empty hands. yororotou koo tikootihe.

I shot vertically. yororowe ya the niyakema.

to stand vertically, to be vertical, perpendicular to the ground. yororoã.

he hung it. e siki re rukekeitrans.

to hang. rukekeitrans.

quitar los piojos pasando un peine por los cabellos. noma pe yakekeai.

sharpen, file, polish. namo*.

to tie (a knot, a bond). do.

Frog arched its back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to walk arching one. hiketeaprarou.

anhinga. cotúa.

my foot hurts. ya mamiki nini.

foot. epie.

the blood started gushing out. yeiye ke ki, siriri, siriri.

blood gushing from a wound. siriri.

to lower the head abruptly. teiprakei.

Pokorariyoma's daughter searched the house during the others' absence (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and displace objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) in order to search for something underneath them. pokorariyoma.

they have accompanied them. pe yaurayoherii ke a kuhe.

they have accompanied them. yaurayoherii.

bone tip for arrows. namopi.

the skull of the tapir is there, full of termites. kihi shama ke the hesi pata ereeremapi kona shi ma totihii.

skull, cranium. ereeremapi.

to bend, to fold, to curve. kohe.

the water boils. u yoruu.

to boil, to bubble, to be effervescent. yoru.

brother-in-law, behave well, you do not sit properly, and the paths of the hekura do not reach you. shoriwe a ta totihiparu she, wa rea toami yaiwe, pei yoka he re tatokai tharei (cha.

to reach, to arrive at. tatokai.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiapraro.

to hurry, to rush. haii.

even though it is very far away, bring me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. yaferi.

recover, it was the plantains that made you feel that way. a ta oweheri, kuratha ani wa shi wãrirayou kuhe (mit.

to recover, to get better. oweheai.

to be deep. ka taro.

¿qué frutos son esos. weti pei ke the ki.

¿con qué. weti hami the re kuini mãrohã ya ki.

what, which. ki.

(se supo luego que) él había visitado todos los peñascos de la región. wa mape no heteprai shoarayou ta no kureshini (mit.

peñascos de la región. kureshini.

to arch, to be arched; to be lying back due to a load with too short a strap (the load rests on the kidneys instead of the buttocks). mi krehetheo.

to arch, to bend backwards. krehethe.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to have something to accompany a food. tehiapou.

to have formed a blister on the hand. oma.

sostienen el techo de la casa de los antepasados. the ki rahakapi makekeprarou yaioma.

house. yaioma.

to have come off locally (skin of a smoked fish). proprokoa.

Rabipelado was already far away when he thought: "And if I flew. nãroriwe a payeketao waikiwe tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma.

to fly. perayou.

oscillate, be animated. akeakemo.

within a moment the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky), he said. waiha, iha mothoka yahatotoprope, a re kuuwei.

to descend to the ground. yahatotorayou.

to pinch someone with the nails (once). tiriai.

to be forming breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). fãkãmi.

to desand the path in a specific place. tatokei.

they had placed themselves side by side and Macagua was directing them (myth). ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to dig repeatedly in the ground or earth to make the hole wider and deeper. theitheimou.

to walk/go quickly. rohice.

to disturb, to bother, to hinder the proper development of something. yapekerei.

The banana is completely moldy. Tha kɨrɨ ohore.

to be completely moldy. ohore.

I am the one who will sew the garment. kamiyeni iro ya siki he hãrei.

to have sewn, to have mended. hãrei.

the two sides of the face, the two cheeks. karemoku.

termite (unidentified (animal, plant)); it is edible. atutu.

the onomatopoeic sound representing the noise Yoawe's penis made when he first copulated with the daughter of the aquatic monster Rahararithawe, according to legend. sokã, sokã.

to make love noisily (said by a man). sokã.

the Mount Morãmãna that rises near here, at the foot of that mountain, who lives there. h e i morãmãna ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi keki kothe ha, weti ke a wãri roa.

a mountain name. morãmãna.

a small frog. preipreimi.

to be too open, with the edges too far apart (canoe). rekekewe.

here it really is not healthy (= there is an epidemic). fhei the wãri okehai ma re mai.

to lose power or effect (of hallucinogens, tobacco, magic substances, curare, etc.). okehai.

he was certain that he had an axe and also it can be The word 'puhipou' in Yanomami means 'to miss, to long for'. hãyokoma a kua ya puhipoma.

to be convinced, to have certainty. puhipou.

because I am a turtle eater. totori watimi ya kutaeni.

everyone knows that I am a jaguar killer. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

a graceful twist to statements. -timi.

deform, let become deformed (through negligence). prithothoamai.

what if I insert a twig into its anus and move it back and forth. ya pe posi ta hishãpraa sho.

to insert a thin object into an orifice and move it back and forth. hishãpraa.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). hãnãpi.

to see in dreams people who are far away, or distant places. thare.

a small snake bit me. oru ke kini yare si wetirarema.

it bit me (referring to a snake bite). wetirarema.

they cut rapidly lances from manaka palm stems. manaka si sherisheria re yaiapotayonowehei.

they cut rapidly lances from manaka palm stems. yaiapotayonowehei.

he let his arrows mold. kama e ki shereka rohomarema.

to let mold (through negligence). rohoramai.

I dared to ask him, although I'm not sure of his response. ya wã wapeprao poope, ya kuma ma re kui.

to dare to ask someone for something, to risk asking someone for something. wapeprao.

manufactured object, object that comes from foreigners (during a ceremonial speech). nape itho to manufacturado, objeto que proviene de exvb.

he who behaves like a "White" (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). hei a re napemope (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

foreign, white, non-Yanomami. nape.

they will dream, they will have presages. pe wãri maharimope, pe wãri thapimope (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to presage in dreams (e.g. the arrival of visitors). poremo.

yãnomãmi the hekurapini, ira kahiki wãsipipramai tikorayoma (mit. yãnomãmi the hekurapini, ira kahiki wãsipipramai tikorayoma (mit. ): to the jaguar's misfortune, the shaman managed, thanks to the power of his hekura, to shrink the beast's snout. ): para desgracia del jaguar, el chamán logró, gracias al poder de sus hekura , achicar el hocico de la ﬁera.

set of shamans. hekurapi.

to grow poorly, to grow sparsely. mashishipiai.

I'm going to establish my garden upriver. ora ha ke ya rii hikarimorãyou.

to work on one. hikari-mo-.

on the path, he wants to incrust it on a rock. pei ke maki ha e the shatimai puhioherii yaro.

to incrust on a rock. puhioherii.

only small fragments fell to the ground. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

fragments, crumbs, splinters. peoma.

the. la.

(the pain becomes so intense) that suddenly I have the impression that my leg is going to explode, I walk limping. yetu re ya matha homoprou, ya kayeheapraroma.

I walk limping. kayeheapraroma.

the water of the flood was not rushing, it was approaching slowly. motu ke u hainomi, opisi u owema.

to approach, to get close. owema.

to steal. thomiãi.

to move by jumping, as frogs do. yutuyutu.

suweheri designates a boy of 12-14 years old (pubescent or prepubescent). suweheri designa a un muchacho de 12-14 años (púber o prepúber).

young boy. suweheri.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied at different heights. mi wereheo.

to be directed towards the ground, to hang, to sink, to lean towards. were.

fruit from which a damaged part has been removed by a local incision. hikorea.

the one who is brave, the jaguar (= the warrior cannibal). hei a pata re nosimop e.

the brave one, the jaguar (= the cannibal warrior). nosimop.

to become hairy (for a human), to become downy (for a plant). shipeirayou.

we will walk during the night, since we have just recognized the path. titi ha ke pemaki kuaaheripe, yama yo ma re katitipramarihe.

we will walk. katitipramarihe.

to give away. para regalar.

they (both) answered twice. the kipi ã hua re porakarayouwei.

put both hands, it's a boy (who is going to be born), the mother is feeling it. pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke e yaro, a wã wapai re kure (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

1. To occur twice. 2. To start working in pairs.. porakaprou.

to be hungry. hapapatherimi.

insult each other, you want to discuss and say things frankly. ke kipi ta yahatuayou, pe no wã niya thatai wawetoo shoao kuprei.

insult each other. insúltense.

he/she is very thin. tiritirima henaki.

to be very thin. tiritirima.

they harvest Indian cane leaves by breaking them off with their fingers. komishi henape yeriihe.

to harvest, to pick by breaking off with the fingers, to gather tobacco leaves in that manner. yerirei.

to address someone using this kinship term, to have a mother-in-law to daughter-in-law relationship with someone. yuhamou.

1. to rush, to precipitate oneself 2. to plant, to sow, to transplant in a small area. prouhu.

to tremble for a moment. rayukurayou.

son, we go down to place (on your chest) the music trumpets (the hekura say during an initiation). shete ipa mathono yamaki ta titithayo (cha.

trumpet. mathono.

the bejuco de cadena is concave (in reality it is sinuous). rasirasi thotho a mi hopokowe.

concave. pokowe.

the stars shine. shitikari pe hiwatuwe.

thanks to the moonlight, it is bright. peripo shni the hiwatuwe.

to be naturally bright or luminous. hiwatuwe.

he stumbled violently. a yutuprakema.

he stumbled violently. yutuprakema.

wake up the young people, see that it becomes day again. ihiru pe, pe ta hokekou haitaru, pe the haruu koo ke a re kuimi.

his vigilance gave way when day approached (he fell asleep and) snored. pe the haru oweai totihioimai tehe, a puhi ha mrataruni, a hohoruãmoma.

to become day, dawn. haru.

frog (unidentified animal or plant). The upriver people (or a theri) eat it.. piripirimi.

they were going to offer themselves to the guatura of Yotenamariwe (they were going to their death). y o t enamariwe ke wiipi rukeope ha pe totoai yaiope.

guatura (mythological being). rukeope.

they asked him to accompany them when they went to a momo fruit feast organized by the souls. no porepi ke peni momo ke a ha the pe shoaihe tehe, a nokamapomahe.

to accompany. shoaihe.

headdress of the hekura with the shape and colors of a blue cotinga. watoshe heimi.

mal que no se cura. fyai.

my son-in-law. siyohaye.

cicada (unidentified animal or plant). yakoro.

to start changing direction. akeprou.

speech of upriver. hiyãhã.

I was afraid and startled. ya ha kirinarumi ya ãtiprariyoma.

I was afraid and startled. kirinarumi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kãwããmo.

we moved away as quickly as possible. yamaki rope sheyesheyemoherima.

we moved away as quickly as possible. sheyesheyemoherima.

Jaguar slowly crouched down. irariwe ke a ha roaruni.

dawn broke gradually. the mi ha harutaaruni.

gradually, slowly, little by little. -ariyo.

they are really pijiguaos of the light-colored variety. rasha auaurimi pe ma re kui.

a variety of pijiguao (peach palm fruit) that is less red than others. auaurimi.

to build several temporary shelters or camps (at different times) in the same place. fyãno yarikamai.

to hit someone repeatedly with a stick or club; to build several temporary shelters or camps (at different times) in the same place. yarikamai.

the heat of the house has spread out. yahi a heyoshi he re toreparuhe ye.

has spread out, has propagated. toreparuhe.

a cannibal. herãmiriwe.

to strangle. forãmi hiyãi.

to strangle. hiyãrei.

to put order in what is crammed. wararamai.

it is said that they were accompanied back by the people of Shashanawe. shashanawe theri peni pe ãhã peratayomahe.

a place name. shashanawe.

I will make many scratches on you. pe iprushimararei.

to scratch or make a scratch on someone. iprushimarei.

I was moving hesitantly. kekou kuaaherima.

to stagger, to hesitate (once). weuhu.

dark and arched eyebrows. pei weyomahiki ushipi wathoa.

arched, curved. wathoa.

he hurried as soon as night began to fall. pe the ka mi wai suprahatou tehe a wãri re horeprarouwei.

to be almost night, to be a little dark. supraha.

(he) armed his bow to shoot at Periporiwe. pehi iyomama.

to arm a bow to shoot at a specific target. iyomama.

tell them to be quiet, some of them insist on saying they will go to war. a wã no wasio ta poo, ai pe the pe ã he prakehou tharei.

to insist, to persist, to be obstinate. prakeheai.

es la razón por la cual él estaba enojado. ihi the nowã hã a hushuoma.

como estaba encinta, no podía andar rápido. a shipenapi the nowã hã a haipronomi (mit.

the reason for which, the cause of. hushuoma.

he returned directly where he was. a shariria re korãyoherima.

to go and get information correctly oneself. wãno shaririamai.

1. To straighten, become straight, correct oneself. 2. To go directly towards (this second meaning is not used by speakers south of the Orinoco River, who prefer to use the lexeme katiti-). 3. To straighten (make straight or linear). 4. To give something directly to someone, without intermediaries. 5. To receive something directly from the giver.. sharirai.

I call him father (= he is a classificatory father for me). kama ke iha ya hiimou.

to call (someone) father, to have a father-child relationship with (someone). hiimou.

Jaguar let go and fell. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni.

to let go, release, drop. huheheprou.

to turn one's head. he ahara.

to turn one. ahara.

in the place where the leaves hang down. henaki re teire hami.

hang, incline. teire.

keeping herself at a distance, she parted her hair and looked for lice. noma pe ha taeni, rapa ha e pe hapreshama.

she kept herself apart. hapreshama.

to dent (in one place). wãukumakei.

to enjoy sexually. shi wãri.

to paint round spots on the body by rolling a ball of onoto (red pigment) mixed with saliva on the skin. hikiki.

I don't want to do it, I don't want to inform. ya nowã thai ma re mrai, ya nowã thapimi totihiwe.

to inform, to report. thapimi.

1. To join a departing group at the last moment (the speaker is never the subject). 2. To constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole).. ayaprou.

we set out, we got going. yamaki ha huroherini.

to go, to walk, to move. huro.

those who made cotton balls carried several with them, and accompanied (the visitors). shinari uko re thaiwehei the pe ha yehiarariheni pe nokaope.

accompany. nokaope.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age). eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

if you do. eri.

to have one. hurukurarei.

do not refuse to work, go to the forest (to hunt), you will grow up soon (what adults say to young people to encourage them to move). a mohimotihe, urihi hami ke wa ha huaani, a ta yawea hairi.

to refuse to work. mohimotihe.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

1. to heal, to get better, to recover (health state), 2. to be convalescent, 3. a little, in small quantity. manahe.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to get crushed or flattened by falling or after an impact. thekeheo.

bunch of bananas from a shoot (and not from the main plant). kohorã ke ki.

banana shoot or sucker. kohorã.

to laugh uncontrollably. kohu.

to tie, to bind tightly with a knot or very tight loop. prohohoray.

vine, liana (unidentified plant or animal). uhãwe.

object that has been partially crushed with the incisors. washishirayou.

I already have irritated skin from the heat. ya si fraai re waikipe.

to have irritated skin from being too close to a fire. mamo*.

Horonãmi was a very good hunter. Horonãmi era un cazador muy bueno.

a good hunter. horonãmi.

to be about to go to have someone draw those lines on one. hukepramou.

to be angry. kokoshi.

over the other slope (of the hill). fai the tiwaro ha.

to dig a hole. theka tiyei.

to be situated at a medium height (of a hill or mountain); to sew, stitch, braid, tie together with vines the elements that make up a basket. tiye.

as they had exhausted the firewood, they climbed up rapidly one after the other to the posts that support the communal shelter roof. koã ãsho pe mi ha watherini rope pe tuoproma, totahima pe hami.

they climbed/scaled rapidly one after the other. tuoproma.

he broke an ant nest with his hands and brought it (near his temporary shelter). konakona pe pesi pata ha keretuni, pe pesi praa shoakeyoruma.

ant. konakona.

have you finished painting your bodies. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

but where have they gone. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

have you found them. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

verbal suffix that accompanies a question; it is associated with the perfective in the following forms: RV-perf.-hawe [+ derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning.]; RV-perf.-mt [present progressive] + ku-hawe; RV1 - perf. est. + RV2-perf.-hawe [+ derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning.]. -hawe often denotes perplexity or doubt.. -hawe.

(he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). he ishokore.

(he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). ishokore.

vaina de la palma. hãkãmi.

they felt a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to fear, to worry, to be anxious. haruhu.

Yotenamariwe se dirigió con paso rápido hacia su madriguera. pei pe pekapi ha yotenamariwe ke a pata rahurahua ha yaiikiyoni.

madriguera, cubil, cueva. yaiikiyoni.

to place oneself in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. tharipei.

current of water. wiririai.

to take a piece, a part, for oneself. ayakosirei.

I am afraid. peshiomi nouku.

to be afraid. peshiomi.

To make the water foamy in which one is soaking clothes. Moshiprai hacer que se ponga espumosa el agua en la que uno está remojando ropa.

to make water foamy when soaking clothes. moshiprai.

directional (subject doing something while moving in a certain direction). -imati.

surely his/her tongue became numb (= he/she does not know how to assert his/her rights, does not know how to express himself/herself). ida.

Please, here we have to start being prudent. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to become prudent, attentive (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). moyawerayou.

they found the black-painted (dead) sorcerers scattered on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

scattered, strewn, spread out on the ground. tikukuw.

ashiashirimi: that which is yellow or brown in color. ashiashirimi: aquello que es de color amarillo o marrón. This name is given to the blue macaw (Ara ararauna) and the red-rumped curassow (mãru), whose ventral feathers are brown, to distinguish them from the paruri, which has white ventral feathers. Se le da este nombre a la guacamaya azul (Ara ararauna) y al paují culo rojo (mãru), cuyas plumas ventrales son marrones, para distinguirlas del paruri, que tiene las plumas ventrales blancas.

yellow or brown in color. ashias.

To smear oneself with it. V.

light gray clay. kroakroa.

null. moyerimi.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

to stretch the neck repeatedly. katitaai.

to make something thin, to reduce its thickness. henasikei.

I have the eye irritated by a foreign body. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to have arrived at having the eye irritated by a foreign body. ripuripupirayou.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei (mit.

1. Climb a tree by clinging to the trunk with both arms. 2. Surround, encircle; come to have a circular mark.. harukuai.

log, firewood. ãkoshoku.

to toast or dry as quickly as possible. fshirishiri.

dry. secas.

to come undone, to fall off. kohihiãi.

he returned directly to his house. a shariria korayoherima, kama pe yahipi hami.

to go straight, to go directly. shariria.

to practice an opening in a hollow cylindrical object: to open a hollow trunk (by striking). pareshekei.

as soon as the turtle bit sharply into its throat and sucked (the blood) for a long time. pei orãmi ha poshotomi ke a wawehea ha shoaaruni, a wai ukuukumotima.

1. To drink, suck (breast). 2. To bite sharply (animal, snake); to cut, break off with a sharp bite; to make regular marks with the teeth. wawehea.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

to bite suddenly the bait (a fish). yomiãi.

to call each other. nakayou.

call your mother and let's hurry to return home. naahe ke a ta naka, pemaki koo ta haio.

give my hammock made of vines to your mother. naahe ke iha ipa thoku ta hipeki.

your mother, your aunt (maternal). naahe.

to row at the front of a canoe. orapou.

to dance in the central plaza during a festival with another community, to participate in a presentation dance. prai.

to paint, to draw a transverse line on a person or object. oni hahetiai.

to paint, to draw a transverse line on a person or object. hahetiai.

to become wrinkled, to become flabby (locally). wãpreteãi.

the fish that swirl in large quantities (= the fish that swim in large quantities in the river). hei ki re shurirorati.

to start revolving, being stirred up or swirling in large quantities. shuririprou.

you will accompany me to show me the places where there is honey. puu ke wa himiãpe.

you will accompany me to show me. himiãpe.

the atavío of a demonio advanced more towards the patas of the monstruo (the man found himself in the interior of the bestia). puhiopehe.

branches or a tree fell across a path. mohe yoamakei.

to fall (branches or a tree across a path). yoamakei.

Bot. mamo kasi onionirimi.

tree (unidentified plant). onionirimi.

lie down in the hammock, the fish that swim in the water, without any objection, cut for me with their teeth (something to grab them) (= give me fishing line). wa mi ha yaithoni, hei ke ki re shurirorati, wamaki ã hai mai ke ki ta wetiki.

to lie down in a hammock (during a ceremonial dialogue). yaithoni.

to start doing something of medium or rather large size. proweheprai.

speech from upriver. fasipi.

Hunger has already made us miserable. pemaki ohiri no preaprarou re waikiohe e.

to be miserable, to be wretched. waikiohe.

strong tobacco, spicy tobacco. nakri.

the ancestors rushed towards where the cacao tree was. pohoroa ana hi upraope ha poreri ke pe re priririkei.

again the Waika rushed to leave. waika ke pe pririrou kooherima.

to rush, to converge rapidly in the same direction. priririmou.

we will return home tomorrow. fenaha pemaki koãkoã shoapei.

tomorrow. fenaha.

to cause (negligently) the softening of a cassava bread. wihiamai.

to eat like a glutton. wausimoray.

each time the husband left to hunt, Siroromi arrived in his absence. yamare wãri yimiraimi yaiwe tharomi a kotããi yaimou heama.

she arrived. tharomi.

my older brother has killed a red-faced wood-quail (with his arrow). ãiweni hoya ke a wai tharei kuroi.

red-faced wood-quail. fwamou.

to compress. ãkiki.

unfortunately, when the others returned one after the other bringing game, Iewe confiscated it. ai peni yaro pe koprouhe tehe ieweni pe toai remou tikoma (mit.

to return bringing something. koprou.

the rain is heard nearby. maa a hoã titetewe.

to be near. titetewe.

my hammock is constantly being lifted up (by the hekura spirits). ya peki yepiyepiwe.

my hammock is constantly being lifted up (by the hekura spirits). yepiyepiwe.

the Yanomami occupy an extensive region. yãnomãmi the ki perihiwe prari.

the skin of the serpent karahiri is wide. karahiri siki pata re praukupe ye.

to be vast, extensive; to be wide. prari.

there is a lot of fishing line (rolled up in the roll). matiriawe a sute.

to be thick, dense, compact (everywhere). sutaprawe.

to hit someone with the fist. pariki shei.

to hit someone with the fist during a ritual fight. paromena.

I just stole banana plants for myself. kuratha ya siki kararu thomiã re ayarekirihe.

to steal something for oneself. thomirei.

to go and inform oneself correctly. shaririamai.

a long line. prihai.

the old man was dragged dead along the floor of the house. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

to drag a long object along the ground. iririrei.

it is said that the man from Horetoi whose skin is covered in white spots wants to come and attack me with magic substances. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

having skin covered in white spots (a skin disease). turuweini.

Pájaro minero. Watawatariwe.

pronounce your personal name and also it can be The word 'wãhã' in Yanomami means 'personal name'. a wãhã ta yuo.

name. wãhã.

1. To have a convex mark (hollowed out, and caused by pressure) around the entire circumference (cylindrical or spherical object); to be carved, circularly reduced. 2. To be grooved or channeled circularly by natural causes.. esheheprawe.

that causes nausea. the pariki shi harihamai.

to cause numbness or nausea. harihiamai.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

destroy, damage. wãriãrei.

to have a worried look, to be worried. puhi no sherekanaripi puhipe ushuhuwe.

to have a worried look, to be worried. ndido.

in cuanto a la mujer, cuñado, hablaré, diré que se la muestren. hei misikiri hena re kui, tamariyo, shori, kuuwei ke the.

woman (wife, daughter, sister). misikiri.

to extract something with the hand several times with a quick gesture. mãomãomai.

to make slide an object down a slope, to cause to slide. nihoroãmãi.

serpiente, sapa, mapanare (falsa). severus.

narrow. makokow.

to take shelter from the rain. gawehehou.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

to destroy, to damage. wãriãi.

that has been put in a good position. the totihitakema.

to put oneself in a comfortable position, to position oneself well. totihitakema.

to roll up, to wrap around something, to tie, to wrap, to make a package by wrapping a tie around. yãthoriãi.

sound produced by a wooden object when it is struck several times at regular intervals. krehemou.

to peel, to skin (durative, plural object). si tiprokai.

to have peeled/skinned (perfective). si tiprokorayou.

to peel, to skin (an animal). tiprokai.

she put the two gallinetas to cook, and then hung them. ha tupani, e kipi yaumakema.

she hung them. yaumakema.

to divide in two. hakokoprai.

I will not go with them. ya huu nareo mai ke obthe.

I will not go with them. obthe.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to bend, curve, fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. thorukou.

you will realize the consequences of your action later. waiha wa no wai shihiroprarowe.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to be in a sad situation, to be disgraced, to be defeated; to engage in an action that will have dire consequences. hiro-.

myth. shoakekirioma.

I bend upwards. mi yãprekãi.

to bend upwards. yãprekãi.

term used to address a female younger than the speaker. shetemi.

offer me hayakoari plant, when I am under its effect, I will see the face of the demons of war in the distance. hayakoari ke hena, henaki ta prapari, ihi ke henaki wayu ha ãiãmori pe re niyayope ya pe yãnopi he tharea.

face. niyayope.

you (plural) will stop having hunger. wamaki wãri naiki mraape.

hunger. mraape.

the child is very hungry. koyoshi keekeemorewe.

to be very hungry. keekeemorewe.

a type of tree. kathohi.

hurry to take down your hammocks while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe.

to drive away, keep at a distance (a malignant being). payekepou.

to fish with a fishing line. fyuri kããi.

to fish with a fishing line. kããi.

her mother-in-law protected her daughter (by putting her on the roof). yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini: su suegra humapi ha moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

protected her daughter (by putting her on the roof). moyenayoma.

1. Tear into thin strips the segments of palm leaves (to pass them through the earlobe). 2. Draw several lines on a colored background, cover with lines. tikekeprai.

to start putting/disposing/cutting to the same measure. manikiprai.

that no one remain behind. ai pe huu heparuhe.

behind. rezagado.

to make hard. hihuamai.

to poke someone's eye with a fingertip. mamo hipipei.

eye. mamo.

to buzz. reãã.

we advanced. yamaki rereaherima.

we advanced. rereaherima.

to cause fatigue, to tire. motamai.

he hurried as soon as night began to fall. pe the ka mi wai suprahatou tehe a wãri re horeprarouwei.

to be almost night, to be a little dark. upraha.

the jaguar cut his head off. irani hiima ke he wahetiprarema.

he cut his head off. wahetiprarema.

to have climbed the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikikei.

in the places where the paths meet (entering a dwelling) one only finds ugly and bad people. pei yoka horeape ha wãriti the pe hãtopi ma re shiro reawei.

to be a little damaged. wãritihi.

the great jejenes exterminated the Yanomami, they ate them all. peti nakini yãse nomãmi the ki waa hititiararema, the ki haikiprarema.

to receive something from someone in its entirety. yãse.

the very old man, who had been lying in a hammock hung between two trees for a long time, began to bite the shosho fruit. pata totihiwe a re hakokotionowei, shosho mo wayoai re kukeiwei.

he was lying in a hammock hung between two trees for a long time. hakokotionowei.

sparse, thin, not dense. resheshã.

several small warts. simopirayou.

Woodpecker suddenly hung upside down from a curare vine and pecked at it. mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yetepraikuni, a tootoomoma.

1. To hang or be hung upside down; to dangle. 2. To accompany someone, follow someone.. yau.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to spit, to launch a spit. kreshe.

there. there.

to have the shoulders, neck and chin painted with a uniform layer of dye. f hako r u k e k e o.

to have the shoulders, neck and chin painted uniformly. rukeke.

nevertheless, he fell into the water. pe kea he yatipariyoma.

to fall into water. yatipariyo.

encarámense (sobre la plataforma) uno al lado del otro. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to line up frequently one next to the other, to squat down frequently in a line. rãyopraai.

generic term applied to two common vulture species in the Upper Orinoco: the black vulture, Coragyps atratus, and the king vulture, Sarcorhampus papa, of the Cathartidae family. watupa.

to have a boil. shããpiai.

to lengthen several objects, to wait for something to become long. rapamai.

I have itching on my lip. ya kasiki shihitikema.

to have itching (in a precise location). shihitikei.

the placentas of the children (that he ate) awakened his cannibal hunger. ihiru re pe no sikini the naiki shurukou ha kutaruni.

placenta. no siki.

llegaremos sin dormir en el camino (we will arrive without sleeping on the way). pemaki koprou shoaotayope.

immediately, quickly, at the same time. shoaotayope.

to work in the fields/gardens. hikari-mou.

to untie, to open. mi hape.

to untie, to open. hape.

to cover or mix with sand. mrakatahupiai.

the house is located there (for a long time). kiha yãno kua kupiyeti.

to be located elsewhere for a long time/distance. piyeti.

we stayed together for a long time. yamaki hiratoa heatima.

for a long time. hiratoa.

to hang near the ground, to tie low. yahatototou.

in the borde of the conuco, matas de plátano se inclinaban hacia el suelo (se habían cosechado los racimos). hikari the ka kasi ha kuratha si mi werepraoma.

to incline towards the ground. werepraoma.

to reanimate the breathing of a dying person (lit: to raise the breathing). mishiã isimai.

to raise, lift up, put on high. isimai.

above all do not insist on going. huu he yatiprou mai.

to insist repeatedly. yatiprou.

to assign a limit, to put an end to an extension. kohomakei.

characterized by getting angry easily: he. yãpiriwe: hekura.

characterized by getting angry easily. yãpiriwe.

the son of Jaguar was mute. ira ihirupi e aka porepi re kuonowei (mit.

to be mute; to be unable to speak the Yanomami language; to be unable to participate in ceremonial dialogues. nowei.

they met, without knowing it, at Honey's hearth. yãmonãmãriwe ke hãtopi nahi ha ke kipi re kuariyonowei.

he went out skirting the hammocks hung under the roof of the house. hãto ke nahi pariki hami e ayoherima.

hearth. hãtopi.

dead cows. ware ke pe.

to pierce, to perforate (continuous). hitosai.

to have been pierced, to have been perforated (resultative). hitosano.

to pierce, to perforate. hitoso.

disappointed. hushukei.

they snored. pe hohoruãmoma.

to snore. hohoruãmou.

water. ayara.

to make die quickly. ahimararei.

when (he) had the arrow (in the blowgun), he shot it by blowing. rifu masi titipou tehe a horaprarema.

thin arrow made of palm wood with a fire-hardened tip, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. rifu.

to have the thighs separated, to separate them. yorakei.

overgrown with weeds (especially a garden plot or path). yasikai.

the jaguars were growling threateningly. ware ke ki misisiãmoma.

to growl, to emit a growling sound. misisiãmomai.

this bow is not made as it should be. dishi iyomamou totihitawe ke a thai.

bow. dishi.

the yakoana drug will make you senile. yakoana ke a wãrini wa moyepimarei.

hallucinogenic drug. akoana.

rituals. rituales.

to clean one. titheo.

to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, sick person or elderly person to urinate. niaasi keyemai.

to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, sick person or elderly person to urinate. keyemai.

to make love (said by a man). wãew.

the capuchin monkeys were moving towards us among the trees; they discovered us immediately. yawerewe ke ki imiimama yetu yamareki wãri ayaa ha tikoreni.

incestuous. yawerewe.

(he) painted himself black, perfect tense (southern Orinoco dialect). wayuprayoma, perf.

to paint oneself black during a war expedition. wayuai.

to walk separately. shererai.

to tear or cut lengthwise into two. sheririprai.

to tear or cut in this way to take them. sheririrei.

to divide, split, separate. sherere.

The yawari shot arrows at the toucans, one of them stuck (in a tree). yawari peni mayepi e pehi niyakemahe, shereka e shatikema.

1. To plant, stick, fix perpendicularly; penetrate, embed; rise (mountain). Often used in shamanism to refer to malefic supernatural beings lodged in the body of the sick. 2. To be breastfeeding.. shati.

antonym of usutua. prehiyuku.

to swell (the belly). hihatho.

to draw wavy lines. sinuo-.

I open the fish. yuri ya pe shipe ka thai.

to open (an animal); to manifest objections. thararei.

he ran crying and arrived at his house. miã kãi rerea ha yairiherini, kama pe yahipi hami a koprariyoma.

arrived. yehiherini.

to extend both hands, to have both hands extended (to receive something). imiki porakao.

to extend both hands, to have both hands extended (to receive something). porakao.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

to be wrinkled, to have wrinkles. rukuruwe.

they had their heads shaved out of fear of lice. noma pe no shiki kiri ha thaheni pe he marokoshimou.

they had their heads shaved. marokoshimou.

to become hard, to deform due to heat. torekou.

to produce whirlpools in the water with one. kapokai.

he went to be with the others. ihami a kuo nareotayoma.

he went to be with the others. nareotayoma.

(he) went to hunt animals to eat. naiki wãri thaope ha wãikoyã ke kini wa wãri ta shepa.

to hunt. shepa-.

the cambur fruits are too abundant and spoiling. hei ihiru ke pe rokomipi wãrimou re kupe.

a type of fruit. rokomi.

Moriche blanco bird; Cissopis leveriana (Thraupidae). Pikimari ãshi.

moriche blanco bird. pikimari.

to hold or carry an object by grasping it with the hand. humirei.

a little fat, in a somewhat large quantity. prehehe.

I will prepare a tobacco quid for him. pee ya nahe humikei.

to prepare a tobacco quid to offer it. humikei.

some women had placed (there) tobacco. suwe theni pee ke pe nahe wãri no maketakiraheshi.

they had placed (there). maketakiraheshi.

father-in-law, what is in the basket that you hung over the fire. shoape, mihi weti pei wa the pe thari yaumaparei kuhe.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

to hang something, to suspend something. ape.

(racimos) pender. yarorai.

to hang, to dangle. yaroro.

to walk leaning on a staff. hitheimo.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

blow. golpe.

you, you are content with eating (alone) little by little the wapu fruits. kaheni wapu wa ki wapraai poo e.

you don't matter to me. k ahe wamaki kuo poo.

to do (without caring about the consequences), to do (without apparent reason); to be content with. puo.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and smash your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to invite oneself to a meal, to join a group of people who are eating. hetuo.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been tied (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to begin to tie firmly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. hateteprai.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied at different heights. mi wereheo.

to be tilted or unbalanced (e.g. a canoe), with one end higher than the other. werehekei.

he suddenly reached Aparecido's path. pore ke a mãyo hami yeture e ha hapraa ha heikuni.

to reach a path unexpectedly or sooner than expected. heikuni.

to dig shallow holes (durative or plural object). maketimai.

in an instant the woman became pregnant and her belly quickly swelled. en un instante la mujer estuvo encinta y su vientre rápidamente engrosó.

to be pregnant. poreri1.

when it started to rain, she went to collect leaves under which she took shelter. maa a kei tehe, yãã ke the henaki ha thakini, a he yohokema.

to take shelter, to be sheltered under something. yohoo.

to bruise (plural objects), perfective aspect. wãokorariyo.

to be hungry. praroimi.

to become a viscous mass due to heat, as happens when burning plastic or certain resins (e.g. mai koko). yorikirayou.

to inhale drugs through the nose, holding them in the palm of the hand or with the fingers. fepena kkkai.

to smell, sniff, scent an odor. fni k kãi.

to inhale, suck in, smell, sniff (once). kkkai.

to have received and have knowledge of those information. wãhã hiripou.

to have received and have knowledge of those information. hiripou.

here there are not many, hung together (hanging pots). hei ke e pe pata ma re hãrokowe.

objects hung tightly together. hãrokoprawe.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

we advanced crouched. tereteremoherim.

(she) fled, abandoned her community and husband. shi wahimorayou.

to flee, abandon one. wahimorayou.

hurry up to grow, don't stay at home. a ta yawea ta hairi, yahi ha kuo mai ke the.

hurry up. hairi.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to line up one next to the other and then stop doing it. rãyoprou.

it stretches, slackens (durative). prehuai.

to stretch, slacken, loosen. prehu.

Catch the oshe aka termites and offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to catch termite soldiers of the oshe aka species by inserting a small stick into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). hishãhishã.

high bank of a watercourse, worked by the current and periodic crumbling of the earth. It is said that apparitions live in those places.. weyokosi.

while he kept him immobilized between his thighs, he called his wife urgently. a hututupou tehe pe suwepi ke iha a wã shi hariwe hama.

to keep a person immobilized between the thighs. hututupou.

to be angry. maanau.

como los esperaba silbó para llamarlos. pe no ha taikuni, pe husi heãmorayoma.

to whistle. horomi.

estar convencido. nohi mirãhãpou.

to be convinced. mirãhã.

to fill with dust, to let something get dusty (through negligence). hekãhekãpiãmai.

to make someone release something by forcibly opening their hand. fimiki karoprai.

to make someone release something by forcibly opening their hand. kahu.

to host and feed guests. thãmapou.

1. Defensive palisade around a dwelling (shapono or camp in the jungle) 2. Knife (southern Orinoco dialect). akuri.

the pot has been placed crookedly (it is tilted or unstable). toutami si kayarea.

to be crooked, not straight. kayarewe.

when I sleep deeply I lose all consciousness. ya mio he thareo tehe ya mohotua ma totihire re.

to sleep deeply, to have a deep sleep. thareo.

perfective of the durative (to break in that way). wahathorarei.

why is it that the chiggers always come to lodge under the toes. weti the ha hihu na peni yare mamisi pe no hore waiaprai ayao.

it is him whom I decided to kill. ya waiamar e m a.

to persevere, to pursue, to refuse, to prohibit, to choose a victim. waiaprai.

fish. morocoto.

he saw the souls in the sky. hetu misi hami no porepi pe tararema (mit.

they found the case where they kept their feathers, they threw it away, and it turned into a pava rajadora. kanapo si ha tarariheni, si ha sheyeriheni, mãrãshi a kuprariyoma (mit.

see, perceive, find, discover. tararei.

each time I lose my appetite. ya iyai mohitou si ihehewe.

lose. mohitou.

they will go to get water (for cooking). pe the hethe hikepehe.

Water intended for cooking a meal. hikepehe.

(perfective form of wasihi). wasihikei.

mi hijo ha matado un váquiro, ha escogido una bestia preñada. the hi pe yaithawe tifetiprarema.

has tallado (el mortero) en una madera que no es adecuada (lit.: desconocida). tifetiprarema.

to extend horizontally; to extend a liana from one bank to another of a stream (in order to cross it, holding onto it). karererei.

plant from which part of the rhizome has been removed. tikaroma.

at the foot of the arrow canes of the Yawari passes the path of the jaguar people. yawari pe sherekapi si koro hami irari pe no mãyo pata re wãkirãkiri (cha.

path of the jaguar people. wãkirãkiri.

insect. forã hesi.

leaves of the tharai plant. tharai henaki.

small palm; Geonoma sp. (Arecaceae). tharai.

to have emptied the insides of an intestine by sliding it between the fingers. pirarei.

dense and thick (locally). shikorãyou.

I wanted to make her cure (by the shamans), and I prepared a potent hallucinogen. ya niya hupamani, ya the okewe thakei kuroi.

to want to make someone cure. hupamani.

tree. maynensis.

los árboles horoeti son realmente muy frágiles, se rompen muy fácilmente. the hi noni ta yaitani, ihi re the hipe kreyou si ihehewe ta yaitani.

to become fragile. noniãi.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to launch this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to prepare a small bamboo arrow (with which to launch a malefic substance). haitaray.

naha. weti*.

you will be drawn down. wamaki ikokorei (mit.

a spirit that pushes a person to the ground and makes them sick with wãrihotho. ikokorei.

he separated several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to take or obtain several banana shoots. tikarerarei.

listen to me attentively. yimika ta hirãrãparu.

to listen attentively. hirãrããi.

they hurried to shave the old woman's head. patayoma the he shi hariwe hopaheni.

they hurried to shave the old woman. hopaheni.

mientras ustedes se comen los intestinos de la danta, yo me comeré el hígado de la tortuga (lit. shama ke wama shipe wai tehe, totoriye ke ya ãmoku wape.

tortuga. totoriye.

"while they roll down here, I will kill them". "eyeha ke pe wãri kahehou tehe ya pe waikai totihiowe".

1. To slide along. 2. To let oneself slide down a slope, to roll (plural subject).. kahehou.

tall stature. yareheithawe.

the effect of the malefic substance still greatly disturbs me. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

1. To fill completely, to fill to the brim. 2. To be greatly affected by the action of a magical substance. 3. To fill a container to the brim.. rahoai.

to make someone become very angry (and . yorikipramai.

you can see that the vine is not resistant at this point. pe thotho epehea ke a ma re kui.

to be soft, flexible, or pliable. eshehe.

when the disease demons descend from the sky, a red light ignites from the chest of omãyãrithawe. omãyãrithawe ke pariki wake homoprou mi ha paoni, kama re pe ithoprou re tehe.

to ignite, to light up. ithoprou.

to become weak, to become exhausted. he pahatoko.

to become weak, to become exhausted. pahatoko.

he pricked the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

it's still somewhat far. the ihete prahawe.

1. to prick or pierce with the tip of a branch; to move on tiptoe; to cling to the treetop and stretch the neck to see; source, spring. 2. adverb: almost. 3. verb intransitive: to march at the head, to be part of the leading group. iheteni.

but, you all did not warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go out first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise, notify. yimirama.

wound. humapi.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiapraro.

to hurry back, to rush away for a short time. haiai.

to be the only one who falls ill. mohothamorãyou.

a large scorpion species (unidentified animal or plant); a mythological character representing an excellent archer, good hunter and good warrior who shot the Moon with his arrow as it was about to escape behind the clouds, its blood spreading over the earth giving birth to warriors. suhi-rina.

fish. coporo.

estar completamente blando. krããhãwe.

father-in-law, there is honey himoto upriver. shoape, mihi himoto a kua ta kuraharuni.

allomorph of -rahari in the presence of derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning. himoto.

to pluck. hukuku.

to decide to accompany someone, to start accompanying someone. yauprou.

the hole in the rock is very narrow. wawa e hena kuprou shoarayoma, yetu ke e.

narrower (hole, cavity). wãkikirayou.

dubitative modality. sihewe.

to crush a soft object with the foot; to step on a dangerous object. karukai.

he filled the hollow of the tree up to the brim with honey. hii ke hi ka ha puu u pe pata manikamama (mit.

to fill up to the brim. manikamama.

you, you will crouch down under him and get under his back without him noticing. k afe pei ke pehithepi hami ha wa fa yereikuni, pei ke fumapi hami wa kuprou fãthoowe.

to crouch down with limbs drawn in and neck tucked in (in order to not be seen). yereikuni.

to fan, to wave (perfective durative). yahuhurei.

to make war (lit. to make love mutually). na wayou.

to wrinkle the forehead. huko siki riikio.

to wrinkle the forehead. riikio.

he roasted plantains with their skin. sikosi kuratha ke ki yaama.

1. Object with its skin, bark or feathers: not peeled, not debarked, not deplumated. 2. Place in the forest where the undergrowth has not yet been cleared (when one clears it).. sikosi.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogenic substance, I imagine very distant things (lit. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

to be under the effect of a hallucinogenic substance, to lose sense of reality, to have abnormal behavior. wãrioprou.

when everyone returned she went to show them the path. the pe komi ha koponi kasha ke a mimai mi paoma (mit.

to show, to make see. mimai.

to tie the foreskin to a cotton thread around the waist. mo ãteteo.

I slipped in the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

to have slid down, to have slipped down. kaherayou.

it broke into several pieces when it fell to the ground. a hiki ha shetepani, thoku ha prakini, karahirima e kei tehe poko yehekiprariyoma.

it broke into several pieces. yehekiprariyoma.

to stop stinging/biting. noshi imããi.

the woman responds easily to men's advances. suwe a noshi ihite.

to become a bad shooter (after having been skilled in the past). simaprou.

to stop, to cease. ima.

cuando tenían hambre, preparaban frutos wapu (mezclándolos con agua), y se los daban de comer (de manera regular). oheo ke tehe wapu ke a thaheni upe koapramahe.

they gave them to eat (regularly). koapramahe.

you will be caught by a jaguar. irani ke wa huweretu.

to be caught/captured. huweretu.

have you finished painting your bodies. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

but where have they gone. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

have you found them. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

denotes perplexity or doubt. ku-hawe.

Ciempiés regresó sobre sus pasos. kumã rãroriwe ke a yonii mi ha paoimani.

Ciempiés. yoohoami.

in a beautiful house was hung a hammock painted with a transverse line, drawn with onoto. riyehewe totihiwe ke the yãnopi ha thoopi thoku tipruta yãoma.

to paint, trace a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch once transversely. tiprutai.

His hair is stiff and stuck together. Uu shititiai ama.

to have stiff and stuck together hair when wet. shititiai.

to be painted with oni haheti wavy or sinuous lines. foni eyekewe.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted with a light reddish-yellow tint. yãmonãmãritawe a petariyoma, a oni frãihiwe totihitawe (mit.

to draw, adorn with motifs and designs; to write (neol.). oni.

no vayas, parar sus flechas a los peces. gua; a wãri hutihe, wa wãri shepari.

no vayas. gua.

we arrived at the other side (of the hill or mountain). chinkutapareyoruuwei.

the ancestors intended to hit each other, so they sang a hunting ritual song. poreri ke the pe tuyeyou puhio yaro, the pe herii ha kuponi.

to fight by hitting each other, to fight with sticks, clubs, etc.. tuyeyou.

they prepared the yopo, and inhaled it. epena a ha tikikiheni, a koamahe.

yopo (hallucinogenic snuff). epena.

he took off the blade fragment with handle that he was wearing around his neck, and put it on the ground. haoa a re hayuprareiwei, a wai ha prakini.

he took off (an object) that was hanging around his neck. hayuprareiwei.

to have oneself painted with a transverse line. yãprutamou.

as it was night, they searched blindly for small pieces of wood to warm themselves. the mi ruwe ha koã ke ãsho pe wai hosisãmahe (mit.

to search blindly, to search under water. ururu.

following Woman-palm the songs go towards here. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

follow, accompany someone in a movement. rereimahei.

it seems that no one has missed their target, all return with a paují. wãri ai the norãmi yakemai mahei, paruri pe kãi pata koã haikitapeihe.

all return with a paují. haikitapeihe.

tooth of picure that has been pulled out (to make a buril). hayomano.

Conoto took his turn and took the fire. wake nomihireherima (mit.

to take one. nomihireherima.

I made many paujíes (birds) fly up. paruri ya pe shuriramama.

to make (birds) fly up in large numbers. shuriramama.

I have a foreign object lodged in my eye. ya mamo ripuripupi.

to have a foreign object lodged between the eye and eyelid. ripuripupi.

asió la bola de colorante con la cual se frotó el pecho. nara a ha hurihireni pariki oni hirihirikema.

asió. hurihireni.

smell, sniff, snoop. ãkuku.

put an injection (perfective). tiweherei.

to put an injection. tiwehei.

I roasted a cassava bread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

to cook, roast, or bake on or over a container placed directly on the embers, usually a cassava bread. rãmiãi.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

moss. kapurashi.

the cunaguaro died there, only the bones remain. kihami ira ke a nomarayou no kureshi.

died. nomarayou.

the women will certainly see the mortar (when the bones of those we have killed are crushed) (= we will carry out blood vengeance). suwe ke pe wãrini hii ke hi ka mii totihipehe.

since the Yawari woman clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

1. Hollow tree trunk, cavity inside a tree. 2. Mortar in which the bones of the dead are crushed during the paushimou ceremony.. totihipe.

mother, it is because the váquiros kept me in the center (of the herd) that my body emanates a pleasant smell. nape, ware ke kini ware ha mi ãmomapoheni ya ni kreteri hai ke a tharei.

to keep someone in the center of a group. ãmopou.

Elder, important man. peyeprayoperiami.

the edge of the cultivated field, where the new plantings are. hikari theka husho.

edge of the cultivated field. hikari theka husho.

hard, rigid, stiff. hihu.

(no translation provided). e naha the kipi kuo.

male, man. wãro.

as it was raining, I stuck palm fronds in the ground to shelter myself. maa a kei ha ya masikoku ithãk e m a.

the path passes under the barrier of palm fronds. masiko e ki re rere hami yoka horea kure.

palm frond used as protection. masikoku.

to cause muscle aches or cramps. hayeheriamai.

the ancestors who received the celestial disc on their heads immediately became amahiri. hetu misini no patapi pe re sheparenowei, amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

ancestors who received the celestial disc on their heads and immediately became amahiri. misini.

he was in his hammock and was swinging himself with his foot while whistling. the husi heã wãri kayerikayerimou yaioma.

tensing the muscles, bracing oneself on the feet and tensing the body to undertake an effort; swinging oneself by pushing with the foot while lying in a hammock. kayerikayerimou.

(myth): it curled up to jump, it jumped up, and it grabbed the sun. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

1. to become hard like leather, to shrivel up; to curl up on oneself 2. to shorten (by losing a part, breaking). pusutu.

diluted honey. rehere uku.

to be diluted, liquid, not thick. rehereai.

(speech from upriver). feeshe.

the fishing line does not break, even when catching a big fish. yuri pata re pe weio ma kui ãsitha hetiimi tharei.

the chain vine broke. rasirasi thotho pata hetii re kuketayowei.

to break, tear, split, crack. hetiimi.

that can be cut into pieces. perirati.

to imitate (once) the cry of an animal to attract it. hãshãmiãi.

the two women got up from their hammocks and went away. suwe ke kipi re hoketariyoheriiwei.

they got up and went away. hoketariyoheriiwei.

to start piling up. heruyutuprai.

the small stream becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to narrow, to close off, not allowing passage (a stream, a path). horokoai.

the noise made by arrows being shot. taki.

they scolded Horonami because (due to his fault) the bees had already risen to the sky. horonami pe no wã thama, puu naki pe heakaa waikirayouwei ha.

to have elevated, to have risen above, to have reached the top. heakarayou.

(no clear translation). ãshi.

to produce pots. turerai.

to be tall and abrupt. hotewe.

to give or take in small quantity, to diminish, to become small. wãisipimai.

to undress (neologism). ukeprou.

to undress, to take off (clothes). uke.

to crush or flatten something completely with the incisors. washishou.

the váquiros escaped immediately, being accompanied by Sherekanawe. ware ke ki tokua shoarayoma, sherekanawe a rurureherima.

to frequently exchange (an object) or be accompanied during travel. ruruaprai.

to obtain several times followed two objects at a time. yãhuyãhumai.

ah, los chamanes achicaron la boca del jaguar. hekurapini ira kahiki wãisipipramai tikorayoma.

achicaron (made smaller). wãisipipramai.

fruit whose skin separates easily and naturally. ehawe.

to have been affected by the supernatural malefic associated with the vampire and attributed to leishmaniasis. washearei.

to make a medium-sized or rather large object (in relation to the usual size of the object in question). proweheakei.

receive a wrapped object. hãropei.

the thin (old) woman was crouched in her hammock. poreporeyoma ke te wãri tureketaoma, the wãri puushitaoma.

thin (old) woman. poreporeyoma.

the women went to break by hand thin sticks for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

to break by hand thin sticks for the roof of a temporary shelter. fhurohuroma k r e a i.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. hurohuroma.

to wait at home for someone's return. komãpei.

to wait at home. komãpei.

aging, deteriorating (durative). hotei.

I unbalance it (duration). mi eotamai.

to unbalance a container by loading it more on one side than the other. eotamai.

soon it became night and they cut firewood. the he titia shorarayoma, koã ãsho poai re shoarariyouwehei.

it became night. shorarayoma.

to shiver, tremble. rutarutaai.

to make a fire. oroshoshoomi.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the jungle. Õmawe y su hermano describieron una curva en la selva.

curve. peria.

we will really attack that one. nashomi pehe a wãri shaipou yaio.

1. To make an object move by dragging it along the ground. 2. To be at war (ceremonial dialogue); to attack someone.. shaipou.

when the apparitions enter the empty house, they revive the fire by pushing the burning logs towards the center (to warm themselves). yãno proke hami pore pe hai tehe koa wake popohoai.

to push the burning logs towards the center of the fire to revive it (perfective aspect of the durative form). popohoakei.

I left my arrow there where it was (in a tree where the speaker could not go to get it). shereka ya shi wãrimakema.

to leave something where it is (because one cannot retrieve it). wãrimakema.

he suddenly came out onto the path of Aparecido. pore ke a mãyo hami yeture e ha hapraa ha heikuni.

the tobacco grew very quickly and began to flower. yeture nahe ha patarini a raroma.

suddenly, quickly, immediately. yeture.

a type of fish, payara; Hydrolicus spp.: H. armatus, H. tatauaia, H. wallacei (Cynodontidae). tatauaia.

hekura associated with the animal. washoriwe.

to turn around, change sides, be turned around, turn one's back. mi rakio.

to turn around, change sides, be turned around, turn one. rakio.

to cause to be damaged, crushed (end of a long object). thekehãmai.

fruit of the hemare mohi tree; its sugary pulp is eaten directly, the seeds are eaten after cooking in water or over the embers. yerekerimi.

sticky, gooey. sutia.

vendré cuando el día comience a decrecer. the mi shinayuãi tehe ya hupe.

decrecer (el día, después de la caída del sol). shinayuãi.

to know who one is going to kill; to have decided what good one will ask for during a trade transaction. nohi nakapou.

I know what I will ask for (during the trade transaction). matohi ya nohi nakapou.

to have a justified reason. nakapouhe.

tree; Mabea sp. (Euphorbiaceae). ushipi.

it has become rotten/stinking. hithãrirayou.

the hekura went to kill the dog (or: the shamans traveled in immaterial form to go kill the dog). hekura peni hiima ke a nohi washuai ha kuparuheni.

to take a woman without authorization, to seduce a woman with the help of an accomplice, to convince a woman to befriend a man. washurei.

to tense a bow. hãto nahi hithotheai.

to tense, to stretch. hithothe.

to offer someone two objects at once. heruruai.

the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock ledges. the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

they gathered in small groups. thouhuotayoma.

softened, crushed. hushikã.

the yawari are good hunters, they killed many prey. yawari pe nihite heparohowe, pruka yaro pe shemahe.

are you still a good shooter. wa nihite ha shoaa.

to be a good hunter (woman, man or dog), to have good aim. nihite.

my bow got caught (in branches) while fleeing. hãto nahi rukekema.

to get caught or entangled (e.g. an arrow or bow getting caught in branches). rukekema.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). shururu.

shrub; Tabernaemontana heterophylla. ãshãkãma.

to start swatting or slapping. paiprai.

not to fear exposing oneself to arrows, to face someone with the challenge of carrying out a threat (of shooting an arrow at the speaker). niyãpramou.

crawl, walk crouched. tereke.

plant (unidentified). kosipanama.

the traces they had left evoked misfortune (they all died by falling into a ravine). pe re kuaaiwei hami pe mãyo no wãi shi hiroprawe.

Horonãmi got lost precisely on the path of the Departed One. horonãmi a re yakei kuaaiwei.

a place where a deceased person was, or an act that they committed. kuaaiwei.

to make a ball with an object to wrap it. haoto.

to hit oneself repeatedly (while under the effects of a hallucinogen). paiyorayou.

hard, rigid, stiff. yii.

to have a cramp. turapirayou.

cramp. tura.

to be in a curled up position with legs bent against the chest. pushukuo.

rib. repokosiki.

they had fun splashing each other and submerging each other's heads in the water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to forcefully submerge someone. kaoay.

they had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni (mit.

had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer). yaiomopotayowei.

diurnal butterflies. wari mahi.

to lie one next to another for a moment. hohãthãprou.

I will go to live elsewhere (lit. ya he ononoo totihio mai ke the.

the Yanomami will never stop blowing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

not to stay still; not to take the time to do something. onono.

cut the vine. thoo ya thotho peprarema.

picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

cut, finished cutting. peprarema.

Conoto took his turn and took the fire. wake nomihireherima (mit.

to take one. nomihireherima.

he grabbed a liana, with which he folded the small tree, which ended up leaning against the big tree. thoo thotho a ha yãkãreni hii ke hi itutua ahetea ha totihikini.

to put two objects in contact by inclining or folding them. itutuai.

obtuve (pedí) un paquete de onoto de los Shamathari. shamathari pe rii ha nana ya hãro nakarema.

onoto (red dye). nakarema.

extender el brazo. kasheshetou.

to obstruct a specific place. paimimakei.

this arrow with curare tip is good. kihi ai pei namo re hiire a kãi totihitawe.

tip, point, end. hiire.

to get dark, night falls. weya.

to fill with dust, to let something get dusty (through negligence). hekãhekãpiãmai.

to have the voice beginning to change. wã paruripiai.

to have the voice beginning to change. paruripiai.

Venado se ceolada fabricada con la madera de dicho bamraspó totalmente la piel de los brazos. lanke poko siki hoã haikirariyoma.

Venado. lanke.

to cover an object or hide it behind something to prevent theft. shãhotakei.

to make or prepare a small quantity. wãisikiripiamai.

since you tell me that (= since you invite me), I will not hesitate to travel a great distance to visit you. ei naha yamare nowã thai tehe ya the prahawe kapea totihirarei.

1. To find something by searching with the foot 2. To tread the ground (to go visiting). kapeai.

in each place where he had dried his bleeding penis on the trees he had left marked (red) lines. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

as he felt no resistance, he introduced his penis between the pubic hairs (of the woman). the prore ha koikoi pe ha the moroshi epehetou re shoarayouwei (mit.

penis. fmoroshi.

la flecha rozó las plumas del hormiguero cantador que revolotearon. wã sho shoremi re upe wai ha tishishirarini upe wai shiyaam a.

Revolotear, Agitarse, pasar y volver a pasar. shiyaam.

to clear. noshi wãwe.

diurnal butterflies. hurahura.

take one out for me to try. tahiapi ke a ta hukepa, ya the ta wapa.

to take out, to remove. hukepa.

tree species; Otoba parvifolia (Myristicaceae). kooto kohi Bot.

tree species. kooto kohi.

the spider monkeys move along the trees. hii pe hami pasho pe imii.

come back to me for a moment balancing. ata imiprao kooima.

how quickly gossip spreads. kurahe wãno pe ma re imikouwei.

to walk balancing, to move along trees, along branches. imiwe.

to straighten, to become straight. sharirirayou.

this woman who has disappeared (she has fled to another community). hei re ãshi nohi re mraaiwei.

woman who has disappeared. mraaiwei.

(verb root meaning . shoke-.

How hard is the shell of these fruits. kurahe the moku wai yiiwe ma re totihii.

hard, tough, resistant. yiiwe.

the mosquito reye gorged itself on blood. reye a pata makarayoma.

it gorged itself on blood. makarayoma.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen, to make pointed. yakekea.

to peel (a fruit, bark of a root or tree). tiprokoprou.

he stopped, thirsty, every time he passed near a hole with dark and foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

Water collected in holes and depressions. oyokore.

to stick abruptly to the ground. resiprakei.

while they were holding Hokotoyoma, they were scraping his skin. hokotoyoma a huwepipou tehe, a hoãpii re kukeiwei (mit.

to hold, immobilize (with the hand). huwepipou.

lie here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

lying in opposite directions (with the head next to the feet of the other) in a hammock. yoteiku.

the fruits of the moriche palm take on a slightly yellowish color when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to take that color (of a fruit when ripe). okoroshiprou.

I went on foot (not by canoe). wãtetãwashiti ha ya huma.

to go by land (not by canoe). wãtetãwashiti.

to be painted with oni haheti wavy or sinuous lines. foni eyekewe.

to be painted. eyeke.

to give desire for making love. peshimai.

I'm really going to break their shoulder blades with the back of an axe. hãyokomani pemaki pootopi wãri yahekiprai ha totihironi.

shoulder blade. pootopi.

to cause to be affected by the disease associated with the malefic supernatural being washeri (leishmaniasis). washeamai.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami (carried by the current) were passing one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma (mit.

to have been partially emptied or filled (perfective aspect of the inchoative). hayarorayou.

to tie a knot, to knot, to tie with a knot. okorekei.

the demon of the quicksands dragged him to the bottom of its hole. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei.

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. shomiãi.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent (under the weight of the tapir climbing on it). kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei (mit.

small bow for a child. ithothema.

to do the same task in different places, or for the same subject to repeat the same task in different places. ayo.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

sweet, sugary. kretetiwe.

to pass suddenly from one support to another. piyeprakei.

1. (defective verb intransitive) to rise up, acquire a bad position (leaves of a roof). 2. state: raised leaves. posusu.

to dry, to harden, to smoke. whashiti.

hekura associated with the howler monkey. iroriw e.

the people of the howler monkeys (myth). irori.

we walked downstream and they began to recognize (the place). yamaki mi ha wereikuni, the no wãisipi ihipirema.

to recognize. wereikuni.

The guamo tree grows rapidly, invading abandoned fields. Krepohi ãwẽ korãrã wakĩ korãrãyakĩ.

guamo bejuco tree; Inga edulis (Leg., Mimosaceae). krepohi.

coolness that precedes dawn. wahuru.

to mix with. koyoko.

they took the one who lived in this hearth. hei ke yãnopi re kui, a pararureherii kuhe.

to make someone walk in front of oneself; to guide someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child). pararurei.

to move the raised hand from right to left with the fingers spread, to indicate to someone that what they are looking for has not been found. fimiki yãweyãwemou.

to move the raised hand from right to left with the fingers spread, to indicate to someone that what they are looking for has not been found. yãweyãwe.

when I fell again after jumping over a water hole, I stepped on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

Depression or hole in the ground where rainwater accumulates. hawathokoma.

dejar la mano posada. warimapou.

while we were eating, it became totally daylight. yamaki iyatii tehe yama the mi harua re hititimareiwei.

it became totally daylight. hititimareiwei.

to be very angry. ãsiãsirimi.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

to begin to grow. preãkããi.

to laugh uncontrollably. kohu.

just when I was fleeing, my bow got caught in the vegetation, and I pulled it several times to free it. ya tokuu tehe hãto nahi rukekema, hãto re ya nahi ikokama.

to get caught, to get hooked. rukekema.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yanomami have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to pierce, perforate, drill, inject (by repeatedly pressing with the hand on a long pointed object). hiwehea.

to turn one's head. he ahara.

to turn one. ahara.

to be hungry. yoyehe.

to lower or incline the head. teikei.

they hurried to go in search of pijiguaos. rasha ke ki shi toaprarou.

they are the ones who want to go to war without delay (and for the slightest reason). shitou si ihehewe totihiwe ke the pe.

to hurry, to rush to do something. toaprarou.

to break a banana or plantain stem with a rigid pointed object (bow or stick) in order to collect the bunch it bears. tihekiakei.

bird, tanager. ushuwemi.

to hit someone with the fist during a ritual fight. pariki shei.

morichalera fish; Myleus schomburgkii (Characidae). palometa.

give that to the one lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

he keeps his wife in the lower part of the roof (of the home where he lives). pe suwepi a shikãmapou.

the lower part of the roof, behind a dwelling or shelter; to hang one. shikãre.

to eat something crunchy quickly (in a funny way). krãrikrãrimou.

to eat something crunchy quickly (in a funny way). krãrikrãrimou.

I walked slowly, without being afraid. kirii mai ya hutaariyoherima.

he ate without hurrying. a mepe yimirama.

he never hunts. pee nahe ha tihirutaarini.

implies an impossibility, can be translated as . taare.

in the forest she tied the ends of a palm frond (to make a container with it), then she gave birth (inside) to a compact mass. urihi ha karaha si he ha okãpani, the pe pata wareramai kukema.

expel in a compact mass composed of many elements. wareramai.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri.

the fire crackles. frãrãrãrãkiri.

I am the only one who wants to work. kamiye ya shiro ohote makokoa.

at this moment he is alone. a kua makokotoo.

"do not let them give fishing line to them, take only for yourselves". "kamiye re riha matiriawe a wetimatihe, kahe wamakini ke ki wetii ta makokahe".

to be the only one, to act on one. makokoo.

to be half-full or half-empty. tayarakapi.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani.

shake (once). ripukuai.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense a bow (plural subject). iyohoai.

keep on guard. pe ta moyawepraru.

be attentive as you walk. a ta moyaweaheri.

please, here we have to start being prudent. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to be prudent, vigilant, attentive; to be on guard; to awaken to the external world, to begin to understand what is happening around one (for a small child). moyawe.

small stream. yoãyoãmo.

they were walking towards me with their gaze fixed on the ground searching for my footprints. pe the mi teateapraroimai kuperei, yare mãyo taeihe ha.

they were walking with their gaze fixed on the ground searching for my footprints. teateapraroimai.

do not claim/demand anything if you do not want to give anything. no mai ha nako tikotihe.

to claim, to demand, to request. tikotihe.

1. Vine ring, placed around the ankles for climbing trees. 2. Package containing food intended to be cooked over the coals.. hãrohãroma.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

thanks to. kure.

in the branches. wahehou.

termite (unidentified). ãototu.

In the forest, the ghosts were heard striking the trees with machetes as they passed. urihi hami pore pe siparamoma: en el bosque se oía a los aparecidos dar, a su paso, golpes de machete a los árboles.

to strike trees with a machete while passing. siparamou.

in several places they have broken bushes by hand to mark the path where they passed, in one place several paths cross. hii ke hi pe re keapotayouwehei, pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

they have broken bushes by hand to mark the path where they passed. keapotayouwehei.

(Pimelodidae). ediano.

to have extended the head (to look). hiyãhãprakei.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downwards. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to curve sharply downwards. wahohoa.

to be dragged to one side by an eccentric weight. eotou.

the hallucinogen ayukuma gives hunger. ayukuma peni the pe ohetramai.

to provoke hunger, to give hunger. oheamai.

to cool down, to make cool. ruwemo.

when we get tired of living in the jungle we return to the communal dwelling. yamaki periai ha mohipraruni yamaki kooma.

to live, to inhabit; to get into a hammock. peripra-.

they buried sticks at the exit of the burrow (to block the hole). hiki ithãkemahe, pei ke pekapi kasi hami.

they buried. ithãkemahe.

(habla de río arriba. mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. feri.

firewood. ãyoku.

to paint several transverse lines on oneself. yaprutaprou.

in the morning he killed a tapir, he called the others who butchered the animal. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema, ai pe ha pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni, shama a pakekamahe.

a child crying in the absence of their parents; to cry for the dead. pokomou.

hard, rigid, stiff. yihiti.

expresses the modality of inference. RVreshi.

to be too high (wall of an object), to become concave outward, to hollow out a gourd to make a bowl, to make a wall concave outward. wapokoai.

cleared path. kakeai kukei.

to clear vegetation with the foot to make a path. kake.

to increase (in number). thetheprou.

they criticize me. yare wãhã wayoaihe.

is criticizing the only thing you Yanomami know how to do. yãnomãmi yama the pe wãhã ta wayoa sho, wamaki puhi kuu shiroãi yaio thawe.

to tell, relate. wãhã wayoai.

to strangle. forãmi hiyãi.

to strangle. hiyãi.

on all the tree trunks against which he had smeared his bloodied penis, transverse stains were visible. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe.

he had smeared it by rubbing or applying something to it. hãhioheripe.

to make hang. reikiamai.

smell of vegetation, smell of jungle. uriripi.

the conucos where we used to go to get plantains are nearby. kuratha yama pe re tepraaperei ha, the ahete praa kurarei.

the place where we used to go to get plantains. tepraaperei.

to vomit. kanosipe.

to have wavy or curly hair. wãrihi.

to cut a stick so that its end is completely flat and smooth, as the large beetles of the simitori species do when they gnaw the branches of a tree. simitia.

to have the eyes turned or blank. mamoku si he nohorayou.

to have the eyes turned or blank. nohorayou.

to be isolated again. yawereprou.

to purify, to dissolve (under the action of water). pakode.

I am sharpening a bamboo point. ahaka ya kopemai.

to sharpen, to shape into a point. kopeprou.

the hekura prepare magical substances. hekura peni heri a kopematurahe ke.

prepare magical substances. kopematurahe.

the ashes of the dead swell in the stomach (after being ingested). pei pusi hami matohi the pe huruu totihiwe.

I was in ambush, no one came, and a whistling call was heard. ya reoma, the pe kuproimi ha pe the pe husi heã petariyo kurei.

1. To swell, dilate 2. To hide underground to transform into chrysalids (caterpillars); to swim upstream during the rainy season (fish). huru.

cheek, side of the face. karemo.

it was a good hunting dog. hiima a nihitaoma.

to be a good hunter (of a woman, man or dog), to have good aim. nihitaoma.

when it began to get a little light my older brother spoke. pe the mi wãi wãisipi ihehetou tehe ãiwe a wã hama.

when it began to get a little light. ihehetou.

to bend, to curve. payokoai.

to bend, to curl up. ãkrotou.

the vine creaks under the weight of the heavy stone. maa ke ma pata hute ha thotho krininimou.

prolonged creaking sound produced by an object under strong mechanical pressure (traction or crushing). krininimou.

to remember, to recall. ayayeprou.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the (enemy) shamans, to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey. hãho.

la pared rocosa de la montaña es muy alta y hay un piapoco encaramado en ella. pei ke maki tirewe totihiwe hami, iha mayepi ke a kãi re rorakiri.

piapoco encaramado. rorakiri.

to fan. yare.

seje palm with thick fruits. haprua masi.

I am really tired. ya motawe totihiwe.

to be tired, to be fatigued. motare.

because I am a turtle eater. totori watimi ya kutaeni.

everyone knows that I am a jaguar killer. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

graceful expression. watimi.

to have a slightly curved shape (termination). wãheteprou.

to be afraid. teateamo.

to improve the state of a sick person. wakakamarei.

he/she/it is always running. a rereokei.

he/she/it is always doing (an intransitive action). rereokei.

to shout in a certain way: . hoohoomou.

the Yanomami would want to kill me to take possession of my wife. yãnomãmi the pe wãrini yare shei puhi ha topraoheni.

to kill someone in order to take possession of their wife or prey. topraoheni.

Woman-curare crumbled a piece of her skin and let it fall into the throat of the son of Jaguar. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema (mit.

I shell corn. yono ya mope hushishai.

to crumble, pulverize with the fingers, crumble inside the hand. hushishai.

to cure oneself (when one is a shaman). nohi reo.

to cure oneself. nohi reo.

we will come to visit. yamaki yahiiwe.

to make a short visit to a neighboring group, without staying overnight in their house. yahii.

to protect oneself by means of a fence of branches or palm leaves. pesimou.

he wants to share the food of others and now he likes this house (where he is treated well). a ni niya ha rioni pe yahi puhiprai waikirayoma re.

to like, appreciate; to start using a new substance (tobacco, hallucinogen) or to eat a food that one didn. puhiai.

I vomited without realizing (the speaker is under the effect of a hallucinogen). ya suhai hãthoo no kupereshi.

vomit. hãthoo.

Come, come, you will assume our defense. pei, pei, hapohe, hapohe, yamare nohi peyeape.

our defense. peyeape.

to be completely wrinkled or crumpled. ãpreteprou.

to cook several foods in water (perfective, plural object). arirarei.

"I'm going to ambush downstream. "kamiye ke ya praokirio e. ", said someone from Karohi. ", karohi theri a kuu.

to ambush, to lie in wait. praokirio.

to return on one. yapatao.

sorcerers, shamans. okã.

to give birth. tararei.

to make something become dusty (perfective causative form). hekrãpimararei.

they will find refuge on Mount Maiyo. maiyo keki ha the pe he ruoyorupe.

we had just gathered to live together when we went to war with the inhabitants of Maiyo. pemaki hapa komi hirao tehe maiyo theri pe sho pemaki niyayoma.

Mount Maiyo was rising again, very visibly. maiyo ke ki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini.

a mountain or hill. maiyo.

trail habitually used by an armadillo. ikãyepi.

here it really is not healthy (= there is an epidemic). fhei the wãri okehai ma re mai.

to lose its power (hallucinogen, tobacco, magic substance, curare, etc.). okerariyo.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

Guianan toucanet. Aulacorhynchus.

to make darker (a dye). ishimai.

to change slope/hillside. mohe hoteai.

to vary in intensity (noise). fwã mohe hote.

to oscillate, to sway, to rock. hoteai.

to harass. wetiai.

to have diminished, to have become small. sipirayou.

Mujer-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

flat, level. resisiw.

the son of Õmawe got bloated from drinking so much water. omawe e ihirupi amishi koo tehe mãu uni a thororoprariyoma.

I filled their lungs with water and drowned them (the hekura), aren't they floating. mãu u ha ya mishi kãi ha tuparuni ya pe mishi ha tumaparini, pe karorowe ma kui.

water. mãu.

the two went out. ke kipi hara yoma.

to surpass in width. rayoko.

while living. ya rãmi hunomi ya mamiki nikereo tehe tope e pe kuoma.

to mix, to blend, to associate (with people from different communities). nikereo.

a type of bird; Tachyphonus sp. (Thraupidae). mraaV.

he suddenly reached Aparecido's path. pore ke a mãyo hami yeture e ha hapraa ha heikuni.

to reach a path unexpectedly or sooner than expected. heikuni.

this morning I brought the roof poles a little closer. hãto ya nahiki aheamai kuprei.

to bring heavy or bulky objects a little closer to where one wants to carry them. aheamai.

to be hungry. shoeteãi.

I go from one side to the other in search of honey. puu ya pe miãtarai.

to move around and search for something by examining certain places. miãtarai.

to put to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. tekerayou.

twisted, bent at the tip (plural objects). toyekerarei.

to furrow the brow briefly. riikitou.

each will spread them out again. pe the patherio koope ke.

again. koope.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to tear off, to pull off. huhetiprarema.

to untie the foreskin from the cord it is tied to. wahoprou.

the great rock is completely smooth. maa ke ma pata si frakahawe totihiw e.

to be completely smooth, to be smooth and moist. frakahawe.

when the fire throws out a lot of flame you will throw yourself into it (your flesh) it will crackle for a good while and (thus) you will become big and fat. pe wake pata parao totihio tehe wa re niyaprapeiwei, iha wa yoriyorimotima, wa prerayou.

to become viscous, pasty, deformed due to the action of heat; to crackle. oriyorimou.

I saw in a dream the emerald hummingbird peaks, throwing the magic plants (heri) out of their beaks. aroaromi koshi pe ãhã re kure ihi the pe pehi mahari yutuhoma.

to stumble repeatedly; to be thrown repeatedly; to advance by successive leaps. yutuhoma.

father-in-law, put your hands in front of you to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front of them (for protection). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put one. rereketou.

the cassava root emerges to the surface of the soil. nashi koko urewe.

to emerge completely. ureprawe.

to get stuck or become hard. wãkikei.

to trace a curved line from one ear to the other across the forehead on someone. tiwaroai.

bee (unidentified species). narimi.

Why are they inviting me. ware nakapou ma ta sihewe.

dubitative modality. ta sihewe.

to kill someone with an arrowhead. ãtãri ãhiprai.

to kill someone with an arrowhead. ãhiprar.

in the places where a stream of water runs over the emerging rocks, that is where one must start to drink again (after initiation). pei masi ha u wai yoãyoãmope ha wa u wai hapa koarei (cha.

murmuring water. yotãyotãmo.

enemy warriors came here to ambush. wayu pe rokeyoruma.

to come to ambush, to come stealthily. rokeyoruma.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been fixed (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie tightly with many turns, to secure firmly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. hatetekei.

I asked that they grate manioc (and make casabe). nashi hiki hirikimahe.

I asked (for something to be done). hirikimahe.

that will not break. the hetii mai ke the.

the ground cracked right where the ugly man was standing. wãritiwe the wãri re roowei ha a mashitha hetia re he wetirayouwei (mit.

to split or crack in multiple places. hetitaai.

he just passed behind Mount Teriope. teriope ke ki hami a ãyorii kuhe (mit.

to have passed behind, to have gone behind. ãyorikei.

he wants to go live somewhere else, what does he have against me. yare thapi heiaprarai, weti ke the no peshiri ha thaani.

why do you feel resentment towards my mother-in-law. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

to feel regret or resentment towards someone for the loss of an object (lost, stolen, broken). heiaprarai.

Dominated by anger, I want to leave this dwelling. hei ya yãno wãri hoyai totihio puhio yaro, wãyuwã ke the pe wayu ha.

Anger, rage, wrath. wãyuwã.

I perceive the strong smell of the magical plants (heri), it is you who will be attacked. heri re ya ki ni pata hore wahahuai ha, pei kahe ke wa nape shurukou ke a kurakiri.

to perceive a smell, to detect a smell. wahahuai.

to begin to have milk (a woman). suhemoãi.

to marry a woman, to take a wife. fsuwe teai.

to take a woman, to marry a woman. fsuwe toai.

little brother, it is I who marries the woman, I will not let (another) take her. pusi, kamiyeni suwe ke ya thapou, ya teamai mai ke the.

to marry a woman, to take a wife. fsuwe.

Bellucia grossularioides and Bellucia axinanthera (Melastomataceae). orona.

to cause a swelling of the belly, to wait for some bananas to ripen to pick them. yahetai.

brother-in-law, hurry up. shoape a ta haiaprarou.

to move quickly, to hurry. haiaprarou.

to be leaning against each other (elongated objects). hirikiwe.

to have a period (menstruation). yipi-mou.

hey you all, there are váquiros, váquiros. ware ke ki, ware.

there are váquiros (a type of bird). ware.

the cat moves around removing its claws. mishi imisiki kushesheaprarai.

to remove claws/nails (an animal). kusheshet.

although the shamans treated him, he died. a nohi reama ma kui, a nomai he yatirayom a.

to treat, to cure (a patient, by a shaman). nohi reai.

to mount on something to reach an object. hiyãhããi.

to submerge a food in water, to cover completely with water a food that is being cooked. shototoam.

the jaguars were growling threateningly. ware ke ki misisiãmoma.

to have growled (perfective form). misisiãmorãyou.

the earthen wall that blocks the burrow of the waraima lizard. waraima akatho heporashi.

inflorescence of certain grasses (corn, arrow cane). heporashi.

blow me hallucinogen gently. opi the ta shuriripa.

blow hallucinogen. shuriripa.

she ate quickly, bringing the food to her mouth with her hands, it is known that the picures eat quickly. wapu a ha the waruwarumoma, thomi pe iyai ma re ropewei (mit.

to eat quickly, bringing the food to the mouth with the hands. ropewei.

he hung the ripe plantains. kuratha ke ki wake re yaumakeiwei.

to hang several objects. yauamakei.

to probe a makeukeu (southern Orinoco speech); to dig a burrow by rapidly spinning. krohokrohomo.

here. rokido.

behind, at the back. fnohãmi ha(mi).

behind, at the back. fnohãmi.

the door is not secured; the door is not closed. fyoka prore.

to become loose, to become unsteady, to become wobbly. proro.

diagnosis of a shaman indicating that the patient has a shawara stuck in their body. fshawara a shatia.

diagnosis of a shaman indicating that the patient has a shawara stuck in their body. fshawara.

moriche palm. flexuosa.

Is he still alive. a mishiã hai shoawe.

to be out of breath, breathless. fmishiãki pakukutou.

to breathe regularly, to be alive. fmishiãki.

to feel bad. he opikewemi.

to feel bad. opikewemi.

to surround an animal or enemies in small separate groups; to be about to surround. he hãyomou.

to surround an animal or enemies in small separate groups; to be about to surround. hãyomou.

contents of the intestines. shihipe.

to have disheveled hair. prukaka.

Danta went to place herself on a thick divided branch. hiki hãkãrãpi pata kuope ha shamariwe ke a pata tikepareheroma.

to go to place oneself. hãkãrãpi.

they passed one after another, clinging to the trees (that were floating). the pe yetekeo tehe, the pe hayupraama (mit.

to join one after another a group of combatants. yetepraai.

to swirl (water, wind). shimoreshimoremou.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to have a bruise. petiripi.

to become yellow, to turn yellow (terminative aspect). ãrãprou.

(they) gather and form. tishoshai.

to gather and form. tishosho.

warrior. guerreros.

from now on I have no intention of allowing our possessions to be given away (to visitors). hei tehe kamiyeni ya matohipi no hipeamapimi totihiwe.

to have no intention of allowing something to be given. hipeamapimi.

outside, the community of termites put white down on their hair. sipo hami osheri pe he horoimoma.

the community/people of termites that put white down on their hair. horoimoma.

to become completely rough, rugose, granular. erererayou.

they scolded Horonami because (due to his fault) the bees had already risen to the sky. horonami pe no wã thama, puu naki pe heakaa waikirayouwei ha.

to have elevated, to have risen above, to have reached the top. heakarayou.

he went around the camp examining it (then he said): "but where could they have gone. yãno ke pe miã tiporea ha hititiapotuni: "weti hami wa the pe kurayoma ta thawe. ". ".

to go around in a circular form, to go around. tiporer.

we slept in Tayari, in that place we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

the man from Tayari destroyed the wasp nest by hitting it repeatedly with his palm. imikini tayari theri kopina pe re sheprarirahei.

a place name. tayari.

it was at this time that I began to make love (regularly). re tehe ya sirisirimou kutariyoma.

to make love (said by a man). sirisirimou.

I will go away. ya no mraa shoarayoherii.

he is always absent (or: he is always late). a no shiro mrati.

1. Disappear, evade, stop being present. 2. Delay, be absent for a long time.. mrati.

there is honey (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

past tense marker indicating a distant past (more than a day ago). rei.

the cries of Woman-picumonãmãriwe went far away. Yãri yaherikeherima (mit.

Woman-picumonãmãriwe. yãri.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

to become spacious, to become extensive (the interior of an object). yaweteprou.

to wait for fruits to soften in order to harvest or eat them. prehepimai.

that the demons of bitterness fall to the ground, since you want to make me kill. hei a pitha re praope, a koãmiri prerei ma yaio mapei ha, ware niya sheamai ta ayaoyo.

demons of bitterness. praope.

we went down to the river a little further upriver. yamaki ithoa orahakema.

a little further upriver. orahakema.

we, we live there, downstream. kihi kamiye ke koro ha ke yamaki kua totihipekirio.

we live there, downstream. totihipekirio.

Lagarto quickly broke the beehive into pieces, let them fall, and slid down the trunk to the foot of the tree. refariwe oi yetu a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai ha kuikuni, a wãri kua kotheherima.

to let fall, to drop. kemari.

hace mucho que nos peleamos por primera vez, están desafiando. yetu ha ke yaheki thayou parioma, pe pe ã nosi ahiaimi.

to provoke, to challenge. ahiaimi.

the great worms were tapping against the wall. horema ke the pe pata hipihipipraroma.

they were tapping against the wall. hipihipipraroma.

he kept the tobacco pouch on the stone axe handle. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma (mit.

handle, stem, peduncle. fitho.

He lay down on the ground. Rasike ama.

to lie on the ground, to put oneself at ground level. rasike.

to be divisible. shekereamou.

to cause muscle aches or cramps. hayeheripramarei.

there is a smell of váquiros. ware ke ki ni waua.

to be present (smell). wau.

at the end of a long moment the noise they made returning through the foliage was heard again. ihiwe pe the pe re shararamou koimaperei.

to buzz; to crackle. shararamou.

to interrogate oneself. piyekeai.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, don't bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to slide multiple objects along, to make multiple objects fall out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikirãrei.

bow that was shortened after being broken. pusutuwe.

go and stand/put yourself over there. kihami ke a wãri ta kuroheri.

to go and stand/put oneself somewhere. kuroheri.

lizard with bluish tail (unidentified). ãZool.

I'm not saying that I'm going to organize only this funeral ceremony. yãmi ke ya hesi komi koãmai totihio, ya kuu mai.

to make someone consume the ashes of a dead person, to organize a funeral ceremony during which the powdered bones of a dead person mixed with mashed plantains are ingested. koãmai.

ve a cosechar hojas de caña de la India. komishi hena ta tirire.

ellos cosechan hojas de caña de la India partiéndolas con los dedos. komishi henape yeriihe.

caña de la India; Geonoma baculifera (Arecaceae). komishi.

to dry (something). praiku.

the shore (of the water). pakayumomai.

headdress of the hekura whose light is blinding and burning like the sun. watoshe mothokari.

unripe fruits of the paushimi or rokomi species that are not yet fully ripe, and that are dried, green and peeled, over the fire. ambures pertenecientes a las especies paushimi o rokomi que aún no están completamente maduros, y que se ponen a secar, verdes y pelados, por encima del fuego.

unripe fruits of the paushimi or rokomi species. ambures.

to cut down a tree, to fell a tree with an axe. kayapamou.

to extinguish (a fire) completely. ãkikiprou.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

perfective form of the durative verb . hamishirarei.

I will eat it. cometohipi.

Interjection expressing surprise or admiration. te!.

he/she/it arrives. shi komããi.

to arrive, to reach. shiki.

to become acidic, to become sour. nashiai.

to incarnate a hekura. hekura fhekuramo u.

to embody or incarnate a hekura (spiritual being). fhekuramo.

quédense tranquilos, no roben, no dejaré de prohibirles (que molesten a los demás). huritihehe, huritihehe, kiha ya wãno wasio kuyeheo mai ke the.

to prohibit, prevent from doing something. wasi.

now I no longer have a desire to give away my possessions. hei tehe kamiyeni ya matohipi no hipeapimi totihiwe.

to have a desire to give away one. hipeapimi.

they are the ones who ensure their protection, they are. the ãhã wãri hayupouhe, the wãri.

they are the ones who ensure protection. hayupouhe.

magic plant cultivated; Xanthosoma violaceum (Araceae). koyeceum.

to take an object without looking at the person. mamoku si he noho mamo maimi.

to take an object without looking at the person. noho.

one of them suddenly saw him and then all fixed their gaze on him. ai the mamo re keprakeiwei, the pe mamo pruka re shatiprakeiwei.

to fix one. shatiprakeiwei.

to receive an object that someone else has obtained from another person. piyemakei.

to abandon an activity temporarily. huhetou.

have you finished painting your bodies. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

but where have they gone. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

have you found them. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

verbal suffix that accompanies a question; it is associated with the perfective in the following forms: RV-perf.-hawe [+ derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning.]; RV-perf.-mt [present progressive] + ku-hawe; RV1 - perf. est. + RV2-perf.-hawe [+ derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning.]. -hawe often denotes perplexity or doubt.. -hawe.

he did not take long to start climbing Poncha mountain. horãma ke the hehu ha, yetu ke a kãi yãmoo re kuketayonowehei.

the tobacco grew very quickly and flowered. yetu re nahe ha patarini, a raroma (mit.

quickly. fyetu re, excl.

immediately, instantly; to happen or be done quickly; to do something without delay, to hurry. fyetu.

hurry up to grow, don't stay at home. a ta yawea ta hairi, yahi ha kuo mai ke the.

grow. yawea.

to hang a container tilted, to put a container off-balance. akareamai.

during the night the inflorescence of the manaka palm will bend down. titi ha manaka ãthe mi wereprariyo.

to happen downstream. werepraai.

to cut transversely; to paint or mark with transverse lines. faheti.

to close one. ãkiãkimou.

to sharpen the point of something. hiroroai.

the simitori (an insect xilófago) has partially gnawed the trunk of the shrub. simitorini hi ka eshehemakema.

an insect that partially gnaws or bores into wood. simitorini.

to not eat everything, to not give everything. ithororesto.

make cross, let cross, tell someone to cross. pekatuamai.

numerous tracks left by one or several animals. shaiwe.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe.

supernatural beings associated with the glow-worm. akurithaweni.

he made the great horoeti tree explode. horoeti hi pata homopramarema (mit.

(perfective form of -prama) used in the presence of derived forms, modals or others with the same phonological conditioning. -pramari.

to do/execute a task together. Pakihi.

his wife was underneath, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

to place an object underneath, to place at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pehithekei.

to become rough or sharp. namoprou.

to become numerous. thetheai.

(related word). nihite.

allomorph of rati in derived forms. ratu.

he fell ill and almost died. a ha perini a mori nomarayoma.

fell ill. perini.

from whom did you receive them. weti iha wa pe rii terema.

you received them. terema.

dark and arched eyebrows. pei weyomahiki ushipi wathoa.

arched, curved. wathoa.

don't laugh at me. yare noka ikãi mai.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãm a.

did they not kill one of mine. fyare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to laugh mockingly, to make fun of someone by laughing. ikão.

he followed another path. ai yo nosi tea re mahiaherinow e i.

he followed another path. mahiaherinow.

I have thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

a little, in small quantity; slender (a person); thin, fine (an elongated object). ishinapi.

no existían ríos. hei parau pe re kui u pe kuonomi.

river. parau.

to become narrower, to close (a hole, opening, orifice). hookoãi.

to deskin, to skin (an animal). tiprokorei.

I am hungry. kuwãima henaki.

to be hungry. kuwãima.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pamento.

to fall one by one, to scatter (fruits, flowers, etc.). praririai.

dragonfly. yaraki.

with the help of my hekura I will keep the anaconda at a distance. wãikoyã ya ki wãri hãmapouwe (mit.

to hold someone, prevent someone from falling by holding them; extend arms to prevent someone from advancing; use shamanic powers to keep a malefic being at a distance. ãmapou.

falling one after another (fruits). shithããi.

to grab by the shoulders. hãkihikei.

they kept the banana shoots piled up on Mount Mãiyo. mãiyo ke ki ha kuratha sipe hirapomahe.

he left his tobacco quid on the handle of the stone axe. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma.

to keep, to conserve something in a position; to carry (on the back, in the hand, on the shoulder, etc.). hirapomahe.

the fruits of the moriche palm take on a slightly yellowish color when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to take on that color (of ripening fruit). okoroshii.

to assign a limit to. horokoamai.

I will offer you tobacco (separating the compressed leaves). pee ya nahe karokei.

to separate by pulling with both hands, to open by exerting a pull in opposite directions with each hand; to pull off, to tear off. karoai.

to arrive one after another. kupraai.

to diminish (in quantity). porakapiai.

null. kuukuumi.

very early in the morning she hung the bundle from the hammock rope of her father (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

she hung the bundle from the hammock rope of her father. feamapeiwei.

to fear, to be afraid. horihipou.

tu boca apesta. wa kahiki ni hithãri.

se bañaron para puriﬁcar su cuerpo que apestaba. ke kipi ni hithãri pakokai kuaai re shoatariyowei (mit.

to stink, to smell bad. hithãrii.

the arrow broke into pieces upon impact. ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei.

it broke into pieces upon impact. yahetiprareiwei.

Moyenayoma protected her daughter (from the jaguar) by putting her on the roof. moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

roof. moyena.

to hit someone with the fist during a ritual fight. pariki shei.

palometa (fish species). morichalera.

he still has the clothes in his hand. ei siki hoã hohipou shoaa.

to have, to hold in the hand. hohipou.

to pierce, to make a hole (once) using a pointed object. hiroshorei.

Translation:. payoarima kohi.

to intentionally set fire to the roof of a dwelling. piyepei.

because I am someone who has killed. watoshe tuyetimi ya kutaeni.

to have killed, to be someone who kills. watoshe tuyetimi.

don't think you can immobilize me by holding me around the waist. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to tie around someone. hãrokoãi.

bent, inclined, folded under the effect of a load. teiprawe.

why don't you ever want to go to the forest. weti ke the ha wa huu mohio shiroãi.

to have desire, to want. mohio.

to have a bad appearance; to be dirty with mud or ashes. totes.

I knock down the lechosa fruit with a stick. shamakoro ya hirikai.

1. To knock down with a long stick, to harvest fruit by knocking it down with a stick. 2. To scratch, to scrape with the tip or edge of an instrument, making a downward motion. hirikiai.

to become disheveled, to become unkempt. poruku.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

having moved along a summit (of a mountain, hill). porororayou.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another group. pashiki.

they make earth crumble to reach the otter. proro a wãri pakekaihe.

to make earth crumble by striking it with a machete. pakekaihe.

to pierce through clouds or fog (the sun). homo.

initiate someone into shamanism. thamakei.

to place objects on top (plural objects). heakaprawe.

to finish, to exhaust. watheai.

they told me not to do it. yare wasirema.

to prohibit, to tell someone not to do something. wasiai.

it trembles, shakes. u rayukou.

to tremble, shake. rayukou.

to be pleated/folded in several places, to be completely pleated/folded. wãhihãi.

here, in this place, he had received a deep wound in the chest. eyeha ke totihi, pei ke pariki hami ke the ka pata ha wãyãkãoperei.

to have received a deep wound. wãyãkã.

to loosen a knot without untying it by sliding it. waroropei.

desplazarse tendiendo las manos para protegerse. reaprarai.

to start rolling (when the object was previously firmly fixed in its place). yapuruprou.

to urinate. eye.

don't laugh. i k ã t i h e.

Baba started laughing. iwariwe ke a ikãpraroma (mit.

to laugh while moving. prarou.

I will stain you with excrement. pe shiipimarei.

excrement. shiipimarei.

the cotton is soft. puhi mratamrata.

to be soft. mratamrata.

to have oneself painted with dots. tipikamou.

as (the turtle) had its head sunk (in the shell), it observed it and turned it over several times. pei ke pe he wai taroa ha yairini, a mima, pe mi hatuatarama (mit.

to become deep, to sink deeply. taroa.

I will come anyway. ya huu kuyeheo mai ke the.

due to what you have just taken out (from me), my anger will not end. pei wa hore ma terehe hushuo kuyeheo mai ke the.

not to modify one. fkuyeheo.

when he was young and bothered the women, he always stayed in the house when the others were away (to make love). a huyao tehe suwe pe rii ha a no ha hushuani yahi hami a shiro heikioma.

to stay behind when others leave; to constitute a remainder. heikioma.

the path of the hekura is visible when they approach, but they themselves are not seen. hekura pe pe mãyo huu wawetoimai ke a tharei, pei pe taprou ma mai (cha.

to become visible, to appear. wawetoai.

didn't you stay behind to live alone. wa wãri ma re perio hoowei.

I stay behind to work in the garden (while the others have gone to live elsewhere). ya hikarimou hoo.

to stay behind, to remain. hoowei.

they are always crying in the forest (after a mourning period). pe hoyããim i.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

This word is part of various idiomatic expressions. hoyããim.

the feline keeps watch over the prey (that it has killed). irani yaro a he rumapou.

to have something or someone under protection; to keep an object safe from theft; to keep under surveillance. rumapou.

make someone carry a heavy load. terekamai.

I will make a cotton ball and take it, you will ask for it. ya nathe fa thaprarini, ya nathe kãi fa yaﬁrini, wa nakouwe.

to have eggs in the abdomen. fa nathe.

the hen wants to lay eggs. kakara a nathe ihe.

egg. nathe.

then he slid down quickly to the base of the tree. a wãri kua kotheherima.

to slide down quickly along a tree trunk (in order to descend). kotheherima.

fue al encuentro de Siroromi, lo agarró y lo arrojó al fuego. siroromi re a yãkão mi ha paoni koa wake ha a sheyepema.

él llevó tizones. koa wake ki re tetaoheriiwei.

tizón. sheyepema.

give me a hammock. amaka ki ha ware ta toperi.

hammock. toperi.

in the morning he killed a tapir, he called the others who butchered the animal. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema, ai pe ha pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni, shama a pakekamahe.

calling us to gather. pakekamahe.

defenderse con valentía durante un ataque. no waiprai.

tomar una defensa (forma incompletiva). no wãrohoãi.

defend. valen-.

to separate a banana shoot from the mother plant for transplanting. kuratha si tikareai.

to separate. tikareai.

I must be sleepy, I'm yawning all the time. ya nami maharishi ya kahiki shiro rereo.

to have one. rereo.

to remove part of a plant. tikarokei.

Duguetia cauliflora and Duguetia megalophylla (Annonaceae). Anusa.

to cut the poles for the roof of a collective dwelling or shelter; to construct a temporary shelter, to construct a collective dwelling. hãto nahimou.

we constructed the forest shelters by the water. yamaki hãto nahimou re kupariyowei.

to cut, to construct. nahimou.

give something to someone in its entirety. haiye!.

the vulture glides. watupa a reraai.

to plan, to glide, to throw an object so that it glides. remanio.

he covered his mouth with white down feathers, and also his chest. pe kahiki horoimama, pe pariki kãi horoimama.

to cover something or someone with white down feathers. horoimai.

put yourself over there and don't go away (talking about upriver). kihami a wãri ta kuroferi, wa wãri fuu mrai.

in that direction, over there. kuroferi.

to invite. wã no ohiãmo wãno uhutipi (pei).

to invite. ohiãmo.

to embrace, to hug. hãyoko.

he crushed leaves with his fingers repeatedly. yãã ke henaki wãri ha hurukutaararini.

he crushed leaves with his fingers repeatedly (to have luck in the search for honey). hurukutaararini.

to tear by the middle. ikeke.

they traveled a long distance. pe praharayoherima.

they traveled a long distance. praharayoherima.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into smaller pieces repeatedly to eat it. makosiamai.

there are many footprints only in one place, where they broke bushes with the hand to mark their passage. hii ke hi pe re keapotayowehei pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

they broke bushes with the hand to mark their passage. keapotayowehei.

did it take revenge. the no wãri yurenowe.

it killed him/her (an anaconda killed him/her at the water. renowe.

to become many. yateheai.

may the demon of the celestial disc make me sick (by spitting on me several times). hei hetu misiriwe a peria re hearati, ware wãri keshai yaia ta pera.

to spit on someone. kesheai.

to start scraping, removing the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting it superficially, cleaning the bottom of a pot by scraping it. hokekeprai.

to improve the state of a sick person (causative, terminative). wakakapramai.

we are not angry. yamaki ã rahumou mai.

to get angry, to shout angrily while speaking. rahuhou.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

1. to peel the seeds of the yopo plant, 2. to scratch oneself, 3. to separate the two cotyledons of a momo fruit to remove the embryo (which is eaten separately). iprushai.

to soften several objects. fepehamai.

¡atención, sus voces se hunden bajo tierra. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

to sink, to submerge, to disappear into something. ohou.

to be crowded (durative aspect). hithokou.

to be distended, to be too hardened, twisted or deformed. prihãwe.

to loosen (a knot). prohoho.

to go. akeke.

the souls were searching for the gallineta. porepore peni hãshimo a taemahe.

hurry up to look for them while it's still daylight. pe taei ta haiohe, pe the haruo ke tehe.

to search, to look for. taema.

pork meat. koshino yãhi.

domestic pig. koshino.

I put them side by side. ya the erekekei.

to lie side by side, to place side by side. ere-.

to start improving, repairing, arranging, classifying. totihitaprai.

overgrown (especially a conuco or path). yasikikei.

when I was close I sat down. ya ahetetou tehe ya rokema.

to be close. ahete.

I imitated the call of the gallineta, it responded immediately. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to occur immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. horãmireni.

it took little time for the turtle's (sick) head to suddenly collapse. poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to have open eyes, to be awake; to hang partially in the void; to be in balance, to be about to hang in the void (when sliding); to fall seriously ill. reikei.

I started right away to run behind the hill. ai the humomo hami ya rerea ãyoriprou re shoarayouwei.

to pass behind, to go around the back side. ãyoriprou.

to reach a summit or ridge. atotokei.

they killed váquiros and gave the broth of the cooked (meat) to drink (= they killed váquiros and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

to produce a dry sound by moving the jaws (váquiro). unen.

Siroromi crushed his body completely. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei.

he crushed it completely. hutikiatarai.

arrow with a harpoon point. ãtãri ãhi hetho.

the flood waters came pushing the Waika people in front of it. motu ke u hai ha kuikuni, waika ke pe pararumai ha kuikuni (mit.

to start leading, guiding or pushing someone/something in front of oneself. pararuprai.

elbow (back part of the joint). esheenamopi.

habla del sur del Orinoco. rahaka shiiwe.

my daughter-in-law. yuhaye.

to brush past, to go and place oneself or be stuck to someone. pakio.

he slid his hand along the strings of the hammocks. pei re the pe peki hami imiki waroroataroma.

to slide the hand or fingers along something. warorokei.

to paint on someone. yakirai.

to become sticky. husupiprou.

to be cut off a portion (of a flat and round object). a yakosia.

to be cut off a portion (of a flat and round object). ayakosia.

to bite a food while sucking to absorb the juice or pulp. watete.

he wears a necklace around his neck. tope ki harepou.

collar, necklace. harepou.

of. de.

to cause to bend, curve or become sinuous (often referring to an arrow). ethethamai.

object that has been burned. hisika no.

Prueheyoma (them) cursed immediately. prueheyoma a hirai shoaoma.

to curse, to swear. peyeprai.

even though it is only a diadem, it cuts off my breath. watoshe a ma kuini yare mishiãki ta pakukutaherire.

to cut off one. pakukutaherire.

to make something browner by mixing it with soot. ushuhuprai.

The váquiro bird cut through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to cut through the jungle, to take a shortcut through the jungle. tiherirayoherima.

they had made the trunk of air between the tongue and teeth swell, called that is made by whistling in that way. apia ke hi hurumarei no kureshi.

to make swell, to make dilate. hurumarei.

low. yahatoto.

without a doubt they are not very far away. pe ahetoimi ke the.

they are not very far away. ahetoimi.

to break off branches. mãhoãi.

I go in that direction chasing little birds. heyemi kirithami ya pe nosi pou kuimati.

to go in that direction. kuimati.

I approached a wasp nest, and they emerged abruptly from the nest and I ran away. ya re ikuowei hami kopina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

to emerge suddenly; to gush out; to appear abruptly. presheai.

(various related forms). patikai, dur.

to crush, clean or extract by striking with an object. patikiai.

to tear or cut lengthwise, to cut a strip from the edge of something. sheriri.

to dye red, to make something red. iye hãroko.

to receive several banana shoots separated from the mother plant. tikareapei.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

to scratch someone with an arrow, to cause a superficial wound. yaheai.

it was Hiyomarithawe who made him laugh. hiyomarithaweni a ikãã re totihimareiwei.

one who made (someone) laugh. Hiyomarithawe.

everyone left, they abandoned the dwelling. pe komi hua shoarayoma, pe no rii maprou re shoarayouwei.

the children disappeared immediately. ihiru pe no mraa re shoatareiwei.

to go away, to leave the communal dwelling, to disappear, to be absent for a long time. mrapr.

to heal, to cure. hatukeprou.

to roll up or fold over repeatedly, to fold the edge of an object several times. wapuremai.

to collect an object in order to give it. hokekei.

when my house is cold. yãno si ahio tehe.

house. ahio.

to be about to have someone paint part of one. shopohopramou.

left arm. deAnat.

we walked in a long line. yamaki shaiaherii.

to walk in a long line one after the other. shairayou.

to have become dusty. hekrãpirariyo.

Due to me giving them a basket of tobacco, they are now chewing it. pee ya nahe komi yorehi ha hipekini, nahe kareai ma ta kurawe.

to chew tobacco by placing it under the lower lip. pee nahe kare.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to put white down on one. horoprai.

Small rope made from the fibers of the yamaa plant. ãsitha*.

he piled up firewood, he carried all the firewood he needed everywhere. koã re ãsho hiraprai ha shoaponi, ãsho oa haikiamapotayoma.

to pile up. hiraprai.

to become sterile due to shapo. shapopiai.

to be reaching adulthood (a large bird). koriromaãi.

the shelters describe a circle. yãno pe tihiyeai.

Õmawe and his brother described a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they lived then downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma (mit.

to describe a circle, to go around in a circle. tihiye.

the arrow split when it hit (something). ayari thoku rii re yahetiprareiwei, thoku kakiprariyoma.

to break, to cut across, to split. shetepa.

if they take hallucinogens and the hekura converge towards them, I am then convinced that they are true shamans. the pe epena ha koarini, the pe hekurapi hoã puhurao ha, mori: "ei re pe yai.

to set about doing something, to be doing something. puhurao.

(remote past imperfective). pere.

he followed another path. ai yo nosi tea re mahiaherinow e i.

he followed another path. mahiaherinow.

null. parahiri.

to have an urge. ihe.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water and also it can be The word 'frutos' in Yanomami means 'fruits'. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

fruits. frutos.

to communicate news. yimikamai.

while Bear was going around in circles behind, the woman went back home taking the most direct path. teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe, poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriiwei.

to go directly to someone/somewhere. katitio.

I say it frankly to you in turn: it is because you are afraid that you always oppose (our decisions). ya kuu wawetoo mi hetuo re, wa ha kirini wa wã shiro remotii ma re kui.

to say frankly, to declare without ambiguity. wawetoo.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma (mit.

to form a compact mass. wererope.

he fished not with a real steel hook, but with one made from a cachicamo bone. yuri a kããma ihea ke a yaini mai, moro ke iheapi yaini.

hook, fishhook. kããma.

to bite (one or more times, said of snakes). warikiai.

it makes noise while flowing. u shararamou.

to make noise while flowing. shãrãrãmo.

(he/she/it) woke up, became aware. puhi hatukerayou.

to wake up, to become aware of the outside world, to start behaving (young child). hatukei.

he was behaving like a 'White' person. hei a re napemope.

to behave like a . kitanaripou.

to have partially carved or grooved circularly. eshehemararei.

I remove several strips of bark from the yãri natha bush. yãri ya natha ikekai.

to lift, remove (to see, to grab): to detach a strip of bark by lifting it with the fingers, to open a door slightly to look, to partially lift or uncover an object (to see what it covers), to remove a bunch of cambures by pressing down. ikekeprou.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

1. To become brighter, clearer (the sky, the day). 2. To discern, see, distinguish clearly. 3. To be clear, bright (the sky, the day).. hire.

I put the clothes in shelter (so they don't get wet). iro ya siki washiai.

to put an object in shelter from getting wet. washiai.

I reached them in the morichal. eteweshi siki hami ya nosi hurikema.

hurry up, you will reach him. ropaaheri wa nosi huriope.

to pursue, to reach. nosi huri.

your friend. no rimihe.

his/her friend. pe no rimipi.

friend, person with whom one has a relationship of exchange. rimihe.

dense, impenetrable (vegetation). rasisiwe.

the sun declinaba when he arrived at his house. mothoka kaiprou tehe a koã kopema.

to incline abruptly. kaiprakei.

I'm sweating (lit: the sweat comes out of me). ya heyoshi hai.

the burning heat of the house has spread. yahi a heyoshi he re toreparuhe ye.

to sweat, to become hot. heyoshii.

to receive an object carried in the hand with the arm hanging down. yepipei.

esos son dos mellizos. ke kipi erekeã.

twins. erekeã.

to go. kute.

Zool. ya the ereZool. , bird, yellow-tufted woodpecker; I place them side by side. , ave, carpintero real pico amarillo; Camk e k e i: yo los pongo uno al lado del otro.

to lie down side by side, to place two elongated objects side by side. yote.

supernatural being, allegory of death. kamakari.

each time the husband went hunting, Siroromi would arrive in his absence. yamare wãri yimiraimi yaiwe tharomi a kotããi yaimou heama (mit.

to arrive in someone. sirodría.

my basket. shoteye.

I don't have any more arrows (lit. s h erekaye ke ki mrarayou kuhe.

my basket. shoteye.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the back part of a canoe; to walk behind. korotamai.

they are many, standing one next to the other, with the head covered with white down. pe he horoi yorukuwe (mit.

to sprout in large quantities (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). yorukurayou.

Õmawe and his brother started describing a curve in the forest (but did not find the path again), they lived then downstream, there where the Orinoco penetrates under the earth. heyemi omawe ke kipi tihiyeprariyoma ma kui, mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

to start describing a circle or curve. tihiyeprou.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

food. moku.

to paint transverse lines on the body. tiprutuo.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

they will find you if they look for you. hoyããyoruimi.

to decompose, to reach an extreme state of putrefaction (wood, clothing, etc., except when dealing with animal matter). ruthaai.

the wood creaks (it could break), polite warning that the one in front makes to the one following, when people are moving balancing on sticks or tree trunks, to cross puddles of water or rivers. fhi krimou.

to creak, to crunch. kimo.

como los que caminaban a la cabeza cambiaron otra vez de dirección, nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction. akeheprou.

it became completely dark while we were eating. yamaki iyai tehe, yamaki ka he komãrãyou.

to become completely dark (night). komãrãyou.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. irorai.

They live close. pe peria ahetea: ellos viven cerca.

You are still really (too) close. wa ahetepraa totihia ke a kure: todavía estás realmente (demasiado) cerca.

close. ahetea.

to be about to have oneself painted with crossed lines on the body by someone. yãhiripramou.

to kill birds to use their feathers as adornment. fpaushipi.

to become rough, gritty, granular. erereãi.

to obstruct. ka komãtou.

the ancestors intended to hit each other, so they sang a hunting ritual song. poreri ke the pe tuyeyou puhio yaro, the pe herii ha kuponi.

to fight by hitting each other, to fight with sticks, clubs, etc.. tuyeyou.

to be perplexed. puhi weti nahamou.

the hunger torments me and I am perplexed. ohi pe wayu ha ya puhi wetinahamou.

to be perplexed. nahamou.

his brother-in-law immediately turned into a bat. pe siyohapi hewe a kuprou shoarayoma.

bat. washo.

he was wearing earrings of cotinga blue skin. heimi siki reikimapoma.

he was wearing earrings of cotinga blue skin. reikimapoma.

he sharpened the end of his club a lot. himo ora ke a namo thai preyukua.

to sharpen, to make the point of an object very sharp. preyukai.

to make someone breathe, to tell someone to force their breathing. herekamai.

with those bamboos inclined I will make arrow points and inflict wounds. pe ihirupi a suhaaiyepe ka ha tharini (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to finish, to complete; to take all, to eat all. haikiai.

1. To insist on, to persist in doing something despite an obstacle or difficulty. 2. To accumulate little by little, to carry out a task little by little; to cook a large amount of food in several stages. yãshiãi.

to lift or pry something up using a long pointed object as a lever. iyoremai.

to improve (state of health). wãnono.

to be hanging or suspended in the void. mi kayahawe.

to be hanging or suspended in the void. kayahawe.

Tucán voló a su vez ga un objeto) [yatukai, dur. thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepiritha1 vb. 1; yatukou, dur. intr. 2; y aen dirección a la liana rota que todavía se batukuprou, term. t yãteãi, inc. ; yatukurayou, perf. : balancearse [yãteãmai , fact. del inc. o caus. ]. ; yãteyãtemou, dur.

to balance, to swing. yãteãmai.

to remain in a surrounding position. hãyopou.

to bite each other mutually (children during a game or a fight, lovers). wetiyou.

portion of liver. ãmo.

to whiten, to become white. auai.

null. masitha.

hold firmly. a ta rohothoiku.

older brother, hold firmly for a moment. ãi a wãri ta rohothotaru.

to hold firmly for a while. rohothotou.

I was running when I stopped. ya rererani ya upratariyoma.

indicates that two actions or events occur together or one after the other. rererani.

to carry a child astride on the hip. paehepou.

to make something collapse or crumble in a place. hishishikei.

an old man who was lying in a hammock between two trees was peeling fruits by removing the skin with his teeth. pata totihiwe the re hakokotiowei, mo wayoai re kukeiwei.

to peel a fruit by removing the skin with the teeth. hakokotiowei.

to be dry and hard (perfective aspect). yihitirayou.

standing one next to the other. fupraa thãririã.

standing. fupraa.

to get oneself painted with a hand print. raokamou.

to go to the ground several times (due to a load). tihohamai.

he inhaled a pinch of hallucinogen and passed his hands over the hammock strings. epena ke a re rishiãpraiwei, pei ke the pe peki hami imiki wai waroroataroma.

he inhaled a pinch of hallucinogen and passed his hands over the hammock strings. rishiãpraiwei.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to have a bruise (perfective causative). hãepotopimararei.

to add salt. mositiamai.

to have pierced/perforated (once). tiroshokei.

the tábanos have the sucking tip flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahaai.

the woman was seated on the ground. a tirereoma.

to remain seated on the ground for a long time. tireretao.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain Spirit shakes the ends of the house poles. ei maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe.

the poles or posts used to construct a house or camp in the forest. mitihe.

work in your turn. a ohotamo mi ta hetuiku.

wake up in your turn. a ta rãã mi hetuiku.

in turn, in one. hetuiku.

my ear got blocked (after taking a hallucinogen). ya hiyokaki ka komãkema.

to obstruct, block, clog, jam, stuff. atas-.

cutting the forest in long strokes, applying blows. hikari theka hami kuratha a perikiwe.

cutting, chopping (object in long strokes, applying blows). perikiwe.

to comb one. yakekemou.

to be very angry. kirãkirãmi.

in his house I hung my hammock in the direction of the central plaza of the dwelling (from the lower to the upper part of the roof of the dwelling). kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

central plaza. hehãoma.

I go. mi hinowe.

go. hinowe.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is curved. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to curve, to bend into an arc shape. payokoprou.

with his blowgun, he shot a dart towards the momo fruits that hung in clusters. momo kosiki mi shimokore re weteteatayouwei ha the horaama.

to form clusters; to be abundant, in great quantity. teatayou.

to damage or destroy something by kicking (a round object). kahathokei.

to be decorated with circles. foni rohehewe.

to be decorated with circles. rohehewe.

to have enlarged (a surface). hauhumakei.

he wants to wait for the morã fruits to ripen before picking them. morã mape niya ushiamai.

to wait for a fruit to ripen before harvesting it. Ñame.

Supernatural beings responsible for epidemics and certain diseases. shawara*.

to crumble, to collapse (perfective, plural object). hashishirarei.

the pain prevented him from moving. no wãri kiwema mai.

to be unable to move due to pain. kuwema.

tiny demon. pe imiki remanio.

small, tiny. rera.

it is a bird of prey that killed the two, in your absence. koikoimini ke kipi nohi porakaprai hearayou kuhe.

two animals, two enemies. koikoimini.

fmo shãhe : flesh that surrounds the seed of a fruit, edible part of a fruit. fmo shãhe : carne que rodea el hueso de una fruta, parte comestible de una fruta.

flesh. fmo.

speech of upriver. kuripowe.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to crouch aligned one next to the other, to line up one next to the other. rãyoãi.

Prereimariwe looked suddenly. p r e r e i m a r iwe ke a mamo shatipraa shoakema.

suddenly. RV1praa.

es necesario que cortes la palma de pijiguao. rasha wa si ha tuyereni.

suegro, debes agrandar el hueco. shoape wa the ka ha premarini.

short, stocky, of short stature. hokatawe.

Variant emphatic form of asi yai (to exclaim in grief). fasi yai heparo yai.

to exclaim or cry out in grief at the death of a loved one. fasi.

type of bamboo point. raerae.

it was him who kept my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object under water by placing a stone on top of it. kaokopou.

to start tying/attaching something with a fairly long rope. preyukuprai.

on the other side (of the hill) the Toprai river is located. hei ãyoripiyei ha toprai ke u kua kupiyei.

is located. ãyoripiyei.

those who were taking refuge (on the mountain, to escape the flood) brought ocumos close with poles to plant them. pe he re ruonowei peni, pe niya ha tiaheni, ohina pe rekamahe.

to bring close with a pole. rekamahe.

to become lumpy/clumpy. komokotoreprou.

the demon of the quicksands dragged him to the bottom of its hole. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei.

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. shomiãi.

tree. oshe.

it was under the sand and, as it moved, it caused the surface to move. kihami mrakatahu re e hirehiremai kuaai shoaoheriiwei.

to cause a disturbance on the surface (by moving underneath it). hirehiremai.

flower. honokore.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood close together, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

close together. shirikãi.

tuvo que pasar mucho tiempo antes de que el suelo recuperara la firmeza, entonces ellos descendieron nuevamente. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma.

to recover strength, to become firm. hiyakaprou.

to stand upright. yororoãi.

I am in need, I don't even have a pot. pei ke ya horimou kukei, toutamiye ke si kua ma re mai.

to need, to lack, to be in need of. horimou.

to get cold, to become frozen. preyurapiai.

to get cold, to become frozen. preyurapiai.

I am angry. ya hushuo.

he gets angry for no reason and also it can be The word 'hushuo' in Yanomami means 'to get angry'. a hushuo si ihehewe.

to be angry. hushuo.

on firm ground. fhashiri hami.

on firm ground, by land route. fhashiri.

what am I going to say since I am participating in the ceremonial dialogue. weti naha a niya ha kuni a horomou thawe.

to be whistling in the manner indicated; to speak to someone in the course of a ceremonial dialogue. horomou.

he devoured his brain entirely. pe the he yoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

brain, marrow, gizzard of crab. yoshipe.

path/trail situated behind a dwelling. nohãmiprou.

to freeze. preyurapiprou.

to bathe. kãtou.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (refers to the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

to relax, loosen, undo. hihoai.

he was lost on the path, when he saw Cachicamo cola desnuda. a ha mohoruherini, moro a tarareherima.

was lost on the path. mohoruherini.

to become as big as, to become equal to. he usuku.

come to pour it here. eyeha the ta ripraayohe.

come to pour it here. ripraayohe.

cacao trees. pohoroa anahiki.

cacao (plural form). anahiki.

if you come to knock me down, I will repel you and crush your nose by striking it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to crush or flatten by striking with a stick. yatikai.

it is necessary that you tie together again the strips of your hammock. wahe thoku he okãã ha kopani.

to have begotten a male child (in a ceremonial dialogue). fipa ya he okãpe.

to tie, to bind, to fasten. okãpe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). waramashi.

to divide, separate, move away from others temporarily to live apart, definitively separate from the community to go live elsewhere. shekerea.

"It's slippery. "pe the takre. ", declared Wãrishewe. ", wãrishewe ke a wãri kuatarou yaioma.

a mythological figure who declared something was slippery. Wãrishewe.

to do it in a precise place, to act on a precise surface. pathothokei.

the hunger torments me and I wonder what to do, I don't even have ocumo to cook. ohi pe wayu ha ya puhi wetinahamou, ohina ya moku tuai ma marani.

to have nothing. wetinahamou.

the man was vigorously tightening Siroromi. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to tighten, to compress forcefully. ãkikirayou.

supernatural cannibalistic beings that live in this region (the sky). hetu misiri, hetu misiriwe: seres sobrenaturales caníbales que viven en esta región (el cielo).

supernatural cannibalistic beings. hetu misiri.

plant; Spathiphyllum cannaefolium (Araceae). It grows in water, or in places where the soil is soaked with water.. Spathiphyllum.

he is not brave (negative phrase), he does not take revenge. nosi ahiomi ke.

it is said that he does not fear anyone. the nosi hoã ha ahihioni.

to be brave, fearless, daring. ahihi.

the child is afraid. hokotomari uthãhi.

to be afraid. uthãhi.

I got lost. ya mohorurayom a.

I got lost. mohorurayom.

1. To separate, plucking with the hand, the breast of a bird. 2. To peel green plantains or bananas with the hand.. krerokreromo.

that Shamathari became a great shaman (= he has many hekura in his chest). ihi a shamathari re kuini pe pariki thãrimipariyo (cha.

to have many hekura (spirits), to be a powerful shaman. thãrimiã.

he has the intention of coming to attack me with magic plants, that one with the eyes dotted with spots. ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei, mamo pe wãri re tipikiini.

to paint a circle on one. tipikio.

has grown/risen. tirerayou.

Õmawe perforated the ground with his bow to get water because his son was thirsty. omawe ihirupi amishiã ha hãto nahini u hiwehama.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

to perforate, to bore, to make a hole by pressing with a pointed object. hiwehama.

to become inferior, to become shorter (in height, length, duration, value); to stay behind, to stay short of a limit. hawekei.

the arrow got stuck in a branch and they asked him to go get it. shereka a ha shatiikuni a nosiyemamahe: "a ta thaprari".

they asked him to do it. nosiyemamahe.

to reach a summit, a ridge; to move along the ridge of a hill, to follow a line on the ridge. matotoai.

It got tangled in vegetation. Warawaramou.

to get tangled in vegetation. warawaramo.

to remain seated briefly in a hammock. tipeprao.

in the moment when the tragavenado assigned names to the rocks, Mirewakariwe shot him in the eye with a poisoned dart. ma pe ãhã yuai tehe, mirewakariweni hetu keki mamo horapema (mit.

to assign a name, to designate. yuayou.

I am really tired. ya motawe totihiwe.

to be fatigued, to be tired. motawe.

to make the inside slippery. takramarei.

to drag someone by the arm. karereaprarou.

(it) acquires that color. mishi teãpiprou.

to acquire that color. teãpiprou.

when the cambures titiaros are not yet fully ripe, they leave the mouth sticky. tapitapirimi pe shopo ahayewe.

food that leaves the teeth sticky and the mouth slightly greasy. ahayewe.

worn out. rurohowe.

fibers. made.

fibers. made-.

(related to . atayu.

as you can see I am disconcerted and I wonder what to do. ya puhi ma re horihii, weti naha yaiwe ta thawe, ya puhi ma re kuu waikiwe.

not knowing what to do, being disconcerted. horihiwe.

the moka frogs are mating (mounted on top of each other). moka pe yehihiwe.

to carry on one. yehihiwe.

when the fire (of the disease demons) falls like rain on the ground, it is as if a succession of waves were breaking. the ki wake sharirou tehe, hawe pe u sheyepraaihe re urekupraowei (cha.

to crash (of water). ekuprakei.

you will crouch under him without him noticing. pei ke fumapi hami wa kuprou fãthoowe.

to crouch under something without being noticed. fumapi.

estrecharse, apretarse; estar invadido por la vegetación. wãkere.

to receive two objects. horohopei.

to make a bamboo arrowhead too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakororei.

(morpheme). -mo-.

duration, moving away. poti.

bite my nose. yare hu ta opari.

you will not be able to break my head with your teeth. yare he oprai mai ke the.

to bite, to eat (a round object). opa.

to call. wãha.

maracaná bird, Ara severa (Psittacidae). erekeerekemi.

we will arrive now at the place called Kãmohãwe (downstream). kãmohãwe ha hei tehe pemaki kuaai shoaparekirio.

a place name (possibly a river name). Kãmohãwe.

to have power (hallucinogenic, tobacco, magic substance, curare, etc.). oomo.

he/she/it did it locally (sense 2). hirikirei.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihiprou.

you all live upriver. wamaki ma re orapiyeheri.

to be located upriver (from the place of utterance). orapiyeheri.

to be crowded for a moment. hithokotou.

we had just grouped together to live together when we entered into war with the inhabitants of Maiyo. pemaki hapa komi hirao tehe maiyo theri pe sho pemaki niyayoma.

to live together. niyayoma.

sugarcane. yaraka usi.

you, young people, come sit here. ihiru pe, feha ke pe ta roikiyo (habla de río arriba.

to sit for a moment, to sit after having been standing for a long time. rotou.

to be in a state of being. potetou.

to open, to split, to break partially. akatahuai.

do not lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

do not lie. nasimotihe.

to inhale drugs through the nose, holding them in the palm of the hand or with the fingers. fepena ukukuãi.

to smoke a cigarette (neologism). fsikariyo ukukuãi.

to smell, sniff, inhale (once). ukukãi.

collapsed (plural objects). hashishirariyo.

the fish will be spicy. yuri a nakiprariyo.

it is spicy. the naki.

the noise is loud (or high-pitched), it is noisy. the ã naki.

1. to become stronger, louder (noise); to become spicier, more pungent; to become acrid (smoke) 2. to make stronger, amplify a noise; to season with pepper, make spicy (tobacco) 3. strong, loud, high-pitched; spicy, acrid (smoke), pungent (tobacco). nake.

do not touch my older brother's axe (= do not steal it). ãiwe wama hãropi koshi wãri hupai mai.

axe (only during a ceremonial speech). hãropi.

to be hot. mokomoko.

Rabipelado threw his poisoned dart at Lagarto at the moment when he (mounted on a tree) worked with his hands free. refariwe ke a mi re kayahaaprarou tehe, nãroriwe a horama.

to hang in the void, to be mounted on a tree with ankles tied and hands free to work. mi kayaha.

lizard with bluish tail (unidentified). ãZool.

to move further away. prahaprou.

they did not know the plantains and they only ate earth. kuratha pe tai mahei, ei a pitha shiro wai no kupereshini (mit.

they did not know. kupereshini.

to be a little soft. fepehehe.

it is moldy. mishi ruthe.

to be moldy. mishi ruthe.

in the place where the leaves hang down. henaki re teire hami.

hang, incline. teire.

Spy, look without being seen. teaai.

the earth is smooth. mashitha a si kopehewe.

to smooth; to homogenize a liquid or cambur compote by reducing all solid parts. kopehekei.

the others have already crossed. yetu ai the pe pekatua waikiokei.

to cross. pekatu.

to become clear, limpid, translucent. herushii.

to divide, to separate into parts. pashihirei.

hi. mahekotoma.

the monkeys were moving among the trees towards us; they discovered us immediately. yawerewe ke ki imiimama yetu yamareki wãri ayaa ha tikoreni.

they discovered us immediately. tikoreni.

specific noise of a fart, expressed by the onomatopoeia ã f u. efumou.

above all, do not come visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to stand up, to arrive at a community and remain standing and motionless in the central plaza waiting to be invited. yororotou.

termitas oshe ana, vayan a atraparlas, bríndenle a mi cuñado. hei oshe ana wãri re yetere, wamaki akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe e anaki ta hipekihe.

go to catch them. yetere.

to be angry. tikuhu.

to have the habit of going to draw water from the same place. hikepraai.

he had lost his arrows and also it can be The word 'hoyarini' in Yanomami means 'had lost'. shereka ke ki a ha hoyarini.

lost. hoyarini.

the path divides into several others. yo shererewe.

divided into several parts. shererewe.

the raw caterpillars were (arranged) above, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached to the bottom (of the package). heaka ha kasha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to transport a full container to the brim; to keep a container in that state. anikipou.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. okakei.

I throw it outside. sipo hami ya the sheyei.

to throw, to launch. sheyei.

skins put out to dry in various places. pehui.

I say it frankly to you: it is because you are afraid that you always oppose (our decisions). ya kuu wawetoo mi hetuo re, wa ha kirini wa wã shiro remotii ma re kui.

to say frankly, to declare without ambiguity. waweto.

to fill the interior of a hole. wã pawe.

to fill the bottom of. pawe.

to be angry. rekuku.

manufactured object, object that comes from foreigners (during a ceremonial speech). nape itho to manufacturado, objeto que proviene de exvb.

foreign woman, woman who does not belong to the Yanomami ethnic group. apeyoma.

bend over. hore tehehewe.

while he was occupied, he glanced briefly at his son-in-law who was raising his face towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

son-in-law. nikereroni.

I will poke your eye. pe mamo hipipei.

to touch with the end of an elongated object (perfective aspect). hipirei.

as we do not have a shotgun to hunt, I will kill you with my arrows in turn; this is the speech of the upriver people. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani, ihi a ma kuini pe wãri prapou mi fetuo ta totihio.

did they then go there, hungry, looking for food. kiha pe wãri oﬁri taeo mi fua pashirayou ma ta kuhawe.

to speak a distinct language or dialect from the local speech. kãhiãmo.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekeprou.

to pile up, to stack. heruyutukei.

to become soft (certain substances, certain fruits). prehepiai.

destined. destina.

to take, give or receive two objects at a time. yãhuãi.

here it is (without a doubt). hei a ma re kui.

the váquiros were approaching us. ware ke ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

epistemic modality. -i-.

él llevó tizones. koa wake ki re tetaoheriiwei.

tizones (glowing embers). tetao.

convertirse en mal tirador (después de haber sido hábil en el pasado). sisi.

he approached quickly to the place where the ashes of the cremated body were. oshohore ke ki no preope hami, the ikua re shoatakeiwei.

the place where the ashes of the cremated body were. shoatakeiwei.

I make a ring with the vine. thoo ya thotho motoreprai.

to form a circle, a ring; to coil. motoremai.

to mix powders with the tip of the fingers; to stir, agitate, mix (liquid). tikurai.

to shoot with a shotgun. homopramai.

fish, payara; Hydrolicus spp.: H. armatus, H. tatauaia, H. wallacei (Cynodontidae). Its flesh is mediocre and full of bones; it is a fish that draws attention for its very long and sharp predatory teeth.. payara.

they two were the ones who caught the fish. kama ke kipini yuri pe yokepirarema.

they caught the fish. yokepirarema.

you (plural) have not given me onoto. a no nanapi no yããi ma re mãoprei.

you (plural) have not given me. mãoprei.

as soon as she arrived she sat in the hammock next to her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

to sit in a hammock. tipepraa.

to join a group of fighters, to come to someone. etepramai.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after another all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects, at different times; can also connote a frequentative. -pr-.

the hekura were watching the path. hekura peni ke pe yo nohi yetekaimama.

they were watching. yetekaimama.

supernatural malefic beings instantly opened his chest. yai theni pariki pakekeprai nokarayoma.

I responded immediately to their shots, they were heard groaning. ya pe niyaprai nokarayoma, pe rããmorãy o m a.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to occur immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. nokarayoma.

(related to) to kill. tihehe.

(he/she/it) runs. rere-i.

to run. correr.

(he/she/it) looks just like another. a no wãri yokapi mrai.

that cannot be confused, that looks like two drops of water. yokapimi.

as Macagua was angry, they returned on their tracks. prereimariwe ke a hushuo the no wã ha, pe e he tatopariyoma.

they returned on their tracks, they went back. tatopariyoma.

there where the lower course of the Orinoco sinks underground, that is where they (two) will live from now on. mahekoto ke u koro rukei totihiokiriope hami ke kipi peria shoakekirioma.

where the lower course of the Orinoco River sinks underground. totihiokiriope.

that has been knotted in whirlpools. moshokorema.

to be few (after having been many). horohoprou.

intestine whose interior can be emptied (to eat it), by sliding it slowly between tightened fingers. piamou.

to widen (a cavity), to enlarge (a surface). hauhamai.

he visto en sueños a los hekura disparando sobre mí (sustancias mágicas) por medio de soplidos. soyare kãi mahari horai re kukeiwei.

to blow on something to obtain a certain result. horashiai.

to harvest honey (by striking to open the hive). puu tuyei.

to harvest honey by striking. tuyei.

"I didn't find the house", he said upon arriving. "pe yahi wãri taproimi", a kuyoruu.

to arrive. kuyoruu.

to be a little dry and hard, to be smoked. ya re ropaa herayoheriiwei, pei ya shiro hi.

fast, quickly. ropa.

the bow covered in resin remained leaning there. the hãtopi nahi sipo tapitapipi rakipraa heaa.

to be located, to be positioned. heaa.

to have been satiated (perfective of the inchoative). poteherayou.

to offer several parts to one or several people. aroakei.

pointed rocks at the bottom of a stream. shirikiprawe.

to dry, to harden, to smoke (something). weheti.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, do not bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to rub, to place against, to slide along; to knock an object out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikirei.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into pieces repeatedly to eat it. makosiamai.

to cut or tear into narrow strips (multiple objects). makosimai.

to cry for a moment. ikitou.

to dry and harden a wet soil by spreading earth over it. yihitamai.

1. waheheprou.

to move, to shake (when poorly tied) (southern Orinoco dialect). wahewahemou.

to fall and get caught in branches, to get tangled (with another tree), to descend abruptly from a hammock. wahehe.

to twist the bowstring by rolling it on the thigh with the palm of the hand (during bow making). hãto nahitha prikipriki.

to twist the bowstring by rolling it on the thigh with the palm of the hand (during bow making). prikipriki.

to be completely drunk (southern Orinoco dialect). ates- hishima amothami.

completely. ates-.

palm. Astrocaryum.

Some snakes (warriors) came here to perch (lie in ambush). oru ke ki re praikiyohe e ye.

to perch, to alight. praikiyohe.

it is sour. the nashiwe.

upstream. nashiwe.

we have come and we have removed the evil (from the body of the sick person, the hekura say). pei, pei ye, yamaki re hayumayoruhe.

we have removed the evil. hayumayoruhe.

to be about to go to have someone draw those lines on one. hukepramou.

Zoology, casiragua, spiny rat; Proechimys (Echimidae). Zool. Nocturnal rodent that lives on the banks of streams, its cries resemble barks a little. , casiragua, rata espinosa; Proechimys (Echimidae). Not consumed. Roedor nocturno que vive a la orilla de las corrientes de agua, sus gritos se asemejan un poco a ladridos.

casiragua, spiny rat. thohomi.

bow coated with sticky and shiny black sap. hãto nahi sipo tapitapipi.

to be coated with a sticky and shiny black sap (moshima). tapitapipi.

the father of Kaw (personal name) informed us (lit. kaw. : is the person to whom the mouth of Kaw calls father). kahiki re hiimouweini yamareki yimirama.

the person whom someone calls father. hiimouweini.

objeto que puede ser. watiki.

to press with the foot, to hold something with the foot. kateteai.

above all do not come back towards us. heyemi wa mi yapaai mai.

to retrace one. yapai.

I'm going to eat my peeled bananas cooked in water. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta wa ke.

Cook peeled bananas in water for me. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta tupa.

small banana variety. kurathaye.

he separated several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to obtain or take a banana shoot. tikarerei.

the fish will slip out of your hands. yuri a he wahoprariyo.

to slip out of one. wahoprariyo.

el fuego descendía rodando velozmente a lo largo de la roca que retumbaba. pei maki pata wake nihorãi ha kuparuni, pei maki pata frãrãrãmou ha kuthoni (mit.

retumbaba. kuthoni.

Horimawe has gone to sit on the path of the weyari, the healing trees will come to you. weyari pe no mãyo ha horimawe a roopariyoma horihori hiki niya re huope ye e.

healer that cures the sick. horimawe.

the palm spathes used as cases and slid under the roof in which they keep their feathers. karaha re sipe re huupouwei, ihami paushi pe re titipouwehei.

elements that enter into the adornment of women and men (feathers, flowers, bird skins, etc.). huupouwei.

we do not stop killing chiggers (there are so many). hihu na pe shemou no tetemi.

kill. shemou.

he brushed the stick quickly. himo the kãi hirikiã ropaa re yairareiwei.

they did it locally (sense 1), plural object. hirikirarei.

the displacement (in the air, in the sky) of the horrible noise that the demon omãyãri makes is barely heard as a faint sound. omãyãri yai the ãsithaki no pata re kiriparuhe, kihami ãmomiã pata yei re piyekope ye.

faint sound, barely perceptible noise. piyekope.

Bejuco colocado en forma circular en torno a una cesta para reforzarla. mothorokohima.

raw meat that bleeds when pricked. friye hai.

raw, uncooked. friye.

obtain, give or receive. pãyereke.

to make a woman sterile using the manaka plant. manakapimar.

when they were close, they gathered to bathe. pe oweai tehe pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma.

bathe. hiraoma.

to the one who barks, put it around my neck (= give me a dog). hei a re houhoumouwei, pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

balancing on the tip of the tree, Woodpecker stretched out his neck to examine the surroundings (myth). hii ke the hi wai ihete hami eshãmiriwe oraki kayahaapraroma (mit.

to suffer from strabismus (offensive term), to have a twisted neck, to have the head not exactly in line with the neck (very offensive). ashewe.

fledgling that loses its down and starts growing its first feathers. makutupi.

fledgling. makutupi.

I am in need, I don't even have a pot. pei ke ya horimou kukei, toutamiye ke si kua ma re mai.

pot. toutamiye.

to be afraid. husupirimi.

upriver (speaking of upriver). kai fesi (habla de río arriba.

upriver. fesi.

to have the habit of navigating in a particular canoe, to depart in canoe one after the other. karepraai.

brother-in-law, don't tell me to keep the woman pinned down (lit. shoriwe ya the ãshi re hikipore kutihe, kutihe.

to keep pressed down, to keep pinned down. hikipore.

they threw the case that contained the feathers to adorn themselves and transformed it into a guan bird, then dawn came to the dwelling. karaha si ha sheyerini, si ha mãrãshipramariheni, pe he harua shoapema.

to throw or toss something. sheyerini.

to flatten the surface of an object that one is making. resisikei.

lagoon that extends downstream. u thookoro.

a moment ago I caught a dove. hoya ya wai tihekiprarei kuroi.

to catch several small birds with an arrow whose tip has the shape of a fork with three or four points. tihekiprarei.

leaves that are used to make the roof of a dwelling and, being found in distant places, require camping in the forest during their gathering. fyãã hena henitiwe.

leaves used to make the roof of a dwelling. fyãã.

I slipped in the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

to have slid down, to have slipped down. kaherayou.

show him immediately how to do it, if not he will have difficulties: "this is how you have to do it", tell him that immediately. a ta wea shoaki, a puhi wetinahamou tao: "e naha wa the thatape", wa e kuu ha shoaoni.

to show how to do something. thatape.

to disperse, to scatter. rãkokãi.

ritual of seclusion and dietary restrictions. shuhuhuru.

they already came (one after another) to get paid. ihi re pe no koprããmãi ha tharei.

to come one after another to get paid (neologism). koprããmãi.

he/she is very thin. tiritirima henaki.

to be very thin. tiritirima.

to have a light skin blemish (probably a fungus). wahipiai.

Carpintero verdoso se hinchó y las varas (donde descansaba muerto) se dilataron. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini hii hiki no shi hariraama.

to swell, inflate, dilate repeatedly. shuwetaai.

to start to speak calmly (after being angry). wapeprai.

sting. hiwehe.

I will take the axe without fail. hãyokoma ya rukepouwei ke the.

I will take it without fail. rukepouwei.

the way the male paují bird calls. kookoomi.

to lose fat, to become thin. romiãi.

to eat like a glutton. wausimou.

to eat gluttonously. wausi.

to have preserved revenge. puhi kãi riyehe.

Nosiriwe cried (for lack of tobacco). nosiriwe ke e peshiri miã ikima.

In all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

1. Ancestor who spread tobacco. 2. This word is used in certain regions to refer to tobacco.. nosiriwe.

to make grow, to cultivate; to let grow. patamai.

to sink the belly. wãheãi.

they are people of the Mahekoto community who did it, only they were there. mahekoto therini, kama pe ha shiroikuni.

to belong to the same community; to be of the same species. therini.

another name given to Thunder. yãmirayoma.

1. Dodge a projectile by twisting the torso. 2. Twist off a fruit by rotating it between the hands; wring out (wet clothes).. ãihi.

to make spin a cylindrical object several times. hamorimai.

to make roll or spin a cylindrical object. hamori.

it was because the woman was a scatterbrain that Teremi eviscerated her and also it can be The word 'wãisipi' in Yanomami means 'in'. suwe ke the mohoti kuteani teremini the re kakaprareiwei (mit. It is a Particle. ).

to be a scatterbrain. wãisipi.

I knock down milky sap fruits with a stick. shamakoro ya hirikai.

to knock down something with a long stick, to harvest fruit by knocking it down with a stick; to scratch or scrape something with the tip or edge of an instrument, making a downward motion. hirikikei.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I always fight against the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

to repeat an action, to do something repeatedly or frequently. kuweni.

she turned her head abruptly towards her daughter. pe thee ke iha a mi yapaprakekirioma.

turned her head abruptly towards her daughter. yapaprakekirioma.

larger type of rajadora pava (mãrãshi). ashapa.

habla de río arriba. nashi.

to lift without effort, for an instant. herehetarei.

towards the summit, at the summit. fesika hami.

upriver, upstream. fesika.

come, you all will defend us. hapohe, wamare nohi peyeap e.

as they wanted to protect the women, all the men had mixed with them (in the group on the march). the pe nohi niya hore ha peyeaheni, suwe re pe rii hami wãro re the ki komi re nikererayoheriiwei (mit.

to defend someone, to interpose to defend someone; to go to help, protect someone, attack a person to defend another. peyeai.

he is dying. a no prekeherii.

he is dying. prekeherii.

to be happy. shoeshoe.

to make many holes, to bore wood (termites). tereshãkei.

the two shapono are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the ancestor Capuchin Monkeys were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to have been placed or to have placed oneself one next to the other (low and rounded objects). tipetea.

to cause to be satiated. tikrohopramai.

to divide, to distribute in several parts (perfective, plural object). pashihirarei.

to press against each other, to squeeze together. hisini.

cucarachero (bird belonging to the Troglodytidae family). otomi.

your fingers make me ticklish. wa imiki shihiti.

that causes tickles. the shihiti.

to have an itch; to cause tickles. shihiti.

the old man that I killed in the war. fipa ya si re turekeaprai.

he tied a monkey. turekeaprai.

to cover the ground, to be scattered in large quantities on the ground (wild fruits). poshoshoa.

the Waika live there and make hammocks. wele ti ipa a ta prapari.

hammock. wele.

the earthworm raised its trunk at the moment I covered the hole with tobacco. mosha husho nimokãi tehe pee ya nahe reha okãpani.

to rise vertically, to emerge vertically. nimoko.

to be inferior to, to be shorter than. hawehewe.

to finish producing pots. turereprou.

everyone knows that wherever I have gone, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco (by planting it in various places). nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma (mit.

to do/perform something in various places. totihiamapotayo.

they took them dead to the shapono plant; they killed them and threw them into the fire. nomaremi ke ki nimashapono hami pe kãi nomawe.

a plant used in sorcery to kill. nomaremi.

1. To shell (e.g. corn). 2.. hushishiai.

now, immediately. opi.

to make a circular motion in the water; to clean a container by making a circular motion with the hand in the water, to wash a cloth by making that motion; to agitate the water in a circular motion with the foot to make fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yapore.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

1. To make someone absorb a malefic substance (h e r i) by mixing it with food; to feed a hekura by offering ami u. 2. To take medication orally (neol.). koamarei.

to be slightly tense. fkarerehe.

(habla del sur del Orinoco.). yawetiwe.

turn, return. koãpatariwe.

peeled. hikeka.

to become dented or concave (in one place). wãuku.

I will offer you tobacco (separating the compressed leaves). pee ya nahe karokei.

to separate by pulling with both hands, to open by exerting a pull in opposite directions with each hand; to pull off, to tear off. karoai.

the raw caterpillars were (arranged) above, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached the bottom (of the package). heaka ha kasha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to fill up to the brim, to reach a certain limit (object). manikiprawe.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

to begin to grow. preãkããi.

they are said to be placed close together. fu re hirikãi.

to be placed or standing close together in a row. hirikãi.

to make boil (perfective). yorumarei.

upriver language/dialect. sharurumi henaki.

wild plant (unidentified). sharuru.

to extract a part from a whole, to divide, to distribute. pashihiai.

while I keep the jaguar away (with my supernatural powers), while it stays at a respectful distance, (you can) take down the hammocks and leave. ira the hore hãimai ma kui, ira a hore tikukuprou tehe, thoku ta thaprahe.

I told them not to move away to avoid being hit. pe tikukotihe, ya ma re kuhe ke.

stoke. tikuku.

to furrow the brow briefly. riikitou.

to be short, to be shrunken, to be low and rounded (an object); to be short in stature (a person). hatakawe.

(speaks of upriver). horeweti.

osamenta del ala de un ave; conjunto de huesos: húmero, radio, cúbito, carpio, metacarpio y falange. hapresheaesos.

breast; teat. sifu.

it was not long before the murmur of the remiges (= the beating of wings) of the hummingbirds was heard. yeture teshorimi heki hoã petariyoma (mit.

primary remiges (feathers). heki.

you won't be able to express yourself better after drinking the spicy drink. wa aka ta hayuowei.

claim that from the Karohi people, since you know how to express yourself so well. hei karohi theri pe riha e ta nakare, wa aka ma re hayuowei.

to express oneself properly; to participate actively in exchanges; to emit an intermittent whistle by rotating the tongue. hayuomi.

(speech from upriver). ãtushi.

"wa, wa, wa. "wa, wa, wa. ", the váquiros walked in a line one behind the other. ", ware ke ki kuu kãi tutuatayoma (mit.

we walked in a line and heard the women crying. yamaki re tutuaiwei, suwe re pe miã kuoma.

to walk in a line one behind the other. tutuama.

blanket. koiha.

I vomited without realizing (the speaker is under the effect of a hallucinogen). ya suhai hãthoo no kupereshi.

without realizing. suhai.

that is what I wanted to affirm. e naha kamiyeni pe niya kuu rukemai yaro.

to declare, affirm conclusively. rukemai.

to bend the edge of an instrument when hitting too hard a surface (generally good steel breaks, poor quality steel bends and twists). tishikimakei.

I only take a dose of the yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi ya ki ayaai.

I collect only a part of the fruits. himohimo ya ki ayaai.

to cook food over hot coals; to offer roasted food to someone. yaamai.

Baba mantenía el fuego dentro de su boca (para esconderlo). iwariweni a wake hopoma.

Baba tenía costumbre de ir a cocer los paquetes de orugas a la selva. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

Baba (a mythological figure). iwariweni.

to speak a language different from the local speech. kãhiã.

stomach ache. peherãrãpi.

to shorten, to reduce (speaking of an arrow that, after receiving several impacts, breaks several times). hatakaprou.

he is angry. nakasiki warirorewe.

to be angry. nakasiki.

Ay, my eyes are already burning. ya mamo pe fraai re waikia tikore ye e.

the chili pepper burns my eye. praki ani yare mamo fraamai.

to burn the eyes, irritate the skin. fraai.

to have painted oneself with round spots in that manner. hikikiprou.

pei. thanoka.

I am the honey and my honeycombs are empty. husira ya kua, ya no ohea ke a kure.

I really want to go relieve myself. ya shi ihe totihiwe ma ta yaitani.

I am someone different (= I am not who you think I am). shomi ke ya rii.

I. husira.

he fell ill and almost died. a ha perini a mori nomarayoma.

fell ill. perini.

the small bamboo arrowhead is really very sharp. rahaka ke a wai hitotowe totihiwe.

bamboo. hitotai.

he/she extends the arm. poko ta kasheshetaru.

to extend the arm. kasheshetaru.

to teach a small child to speak, to tell how to name objects. wã hira.

I took the fish out of the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

1. To land, to reach land 2. To take something out of a canoe. hashiriai.

he fell into the water and drowned. a ha keparuni a mishi tupariyoma.

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs and situations occurring in water or certain locations. pariyo.

to become lumpy/clumpy. komokotoreprou.

the meat of the babilla always gets stuck between my teeth. ya naki hami iwa yãhi hãkikou.

to grab by the shoulders, to hold by the shoulders. hãkihi.

to have wavy or curly hair. wãrihi.

to drink. weikiai.

blow me hallucinogen gently. opi the ta shuriripa.

to receive a dose of hallucinogen by blowing. shuriripei.

he traced a curved line (on his forehead) and immediately set out for the shapono. the mi hore ha tikekeikuni yetu the wãri ha ikutaikuni, shapono hami.

to trace several curved lines on someone. tikekeakei.

my son, I am also not in good health. oãsi, kamiye sho peheki no thawemi.

to not be in good health. no thawemi.

speaks of upriver. yãrekerimi.

they are in good health everywhere. temi the pe hiraprawe.

there is blood scattered on the ground. iyeiye re pe nohi hirawe kui.

to be gathered, to be together, to live in different places. hiraprawe.

injure the foot with a sharp object. mamiki hiio.

injure. hiio.

you all will believe falsely that you are valiant and stoic. waitheri ke wamaki hore puﬁope.

to believe falsely that one is valiant and stoic. puﬁope.

to make an object rotate 180 degrees; to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemikei.

the tobacco is getting moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to be completely moldy. rohore.

the very old man, who had been lying in a hammock hung between two trees for a long time, began to bite the shosho fruit. pata totihiwe a re hakokotionowei, shosho mo wayoai re kukeiwei.

he was lying in a hammock hung between two trees for a long time. hakokotionowei.

to make a cotton ball smaller by using its thread. ãkropramai.

to bend or curve under a weight (for a person). thorukuo.

the myth goes: he stretched it downwards, perfect tense. yãteyãtemotima (mit.

to stretch downwards. yatukamai.

null. werowero.

to boast, to make oneself interesting in front of men, trying to arouse their interest. mokomou.

to nibble, to chew slowly (the tip of a long and resistant object to break it). wenikai.

vomit (verb). kano nahipe ho-.

I learn the songs (or words) of the Shamathari, you will not retain them. kihi a re shamatharirati ya wã rii ha teaprani, kafeni wa wã titipou mrai ke the.

to learn the songs (or words) of the Shamathari. shamatharirati.

when I reached the summit (feeling dizzy) I wondered what I was going to do. kihami ya re heakaai totihio kuhe tehe, weti naha wa ta thawe ya puhi kutaroma.

to elevate, to rise above, to ascend. kutaroma.

Pájaro carpintero se detuvo en diferentes puntos mientras trepaba a lo largo del tronco. eshãmiriwe ke a yeteatarou kuaaherima.

to stop at different points, to pause repeatedly. yeteatarou.

to reach someone quickly. nosi huriprao.

to reach someone quickly. huriprao.

the destructive power of the axe. ayawa koshi.

destructive power. ayawa.

when a woman complies with the ritual of her first menstruation, her husband also does it. suwe a yipimou tehe pe heãropi sho.

ritual performed after a woman. paushimo.

they died. a nohi mohoturariyoma.

they died. mohoturariyo.

ketipa si: bot. ketipa si : bot. , plantain; P h e n a k o s p e r m u m guyanense (Strelitziaceae). , platanillo; P h e n a k o s p e r m u m guyanense (Strelitziaceae). It resembles the banana plant a little, in size and bearing. Se parece un poco al bananero, por el porte y por el tamaño.

plantain. ketipa si.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much. nihitao.

to be in a big hurry. shãkãshãkã nathoku.

to be in a hurry. nathoku.

(he) walks fast and leaves behind in a short time a certain place. he toretai.

to walk fast and leave a place behind in a short time. toretai.

to be angry. kuhãima.

place in the water where the rahara monster lives. rahara ki no poupi.

place where there are many tembladores (fish). yahetipa no poupi.

place in the water where certain animals live in abundance. poupi.

they advanced towards me with their gaze fixed on the ground looking for my footprints. pe the mi teateapraroimai kuperei, yare mãyo taeihe ha.

to incline or bend down to examine the ground. tekei.

he palpated it several times and then said: "it's an old man". a ha huperarini: "pata ke the", e kuma.

to touch different places, to palpate. huperarini.

small. katiti.

no doubt you all live upriver. wamaki ma re orapiyeheri.

to be located in another place (different from the place of utterance) upriver. -piyeheri.

the water eroded the soil all around (and made it collapse). ma pe hishiatarama.

1. To collapse, crumble, erode. 2. To make something collapse or crumble; to excavate to enlarge a burrow. 3. High riverbank carved by the current.. hishi.

Will they invite me (to kill me treacherously) because they have designated me as a victim. kamiye re ware nowã ha hamareni ware nakapou ma ta sihewe.

to designate as a victim. nowã hamarei.

even the coati skins, they (the hekura) carry them bleeding around their necks. yarushe pei siki ma kui, siki iye rukekepou kupohei (cha.

same meaning as rukeai and rukepou, but in the first case it is a plurality of objects and in the second a plurality of subjects. rukeke-.

cracked. krãkã.

to be cracked. hãthothowe.

we entered the water one after the other. yamaki mi hetutayou re kupariyowei.

1. To arrive at a communal dwelling by paths that take opposite directions. 2. To do something one after the other.. hetutayou.

I hit to collect tima honey, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to practice an opening in a hollow object, to open a hollow trunk. pawehamai.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

tronco de árbol rojizo. amarokoma.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered by longitudinal stripes. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to be covered by longitudinal lines or stripes. shetitirahari.

to bend an object in several places. toyekamai.

do not sleep. pe miotihe.

I told them not to sleep. ya kutariyoma.

do not sleep. miotihe.

in company of. pohori.

his/her/its lungs fell, he/she/it eviscerated completely (lit. pei ke hereki kerayoma, the hushomi yaweteprou totihirayoma.

his/her/its interior became extensive. totihirayoma.

les voy a romper de verdad el omóplato a con el talón de un hacha. hãyokomani pemaki pootopi wãri yahekiprai ha totihironi.

shoulder blade. hãyokomani.

termite (unidentified (animal, plant)). fãoma.

to be winding, to have numerous meanders. fshokekewe.

snout. fusho.

to make grow, to cause healing. hatukeamai.

return for a moment on one. yapaprao.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). naasi.

are you going to decide to probe (the den). wamaki re tuo waikiwe, wamaki hipai re waikipohori.

to probe, to sound out. tre-.

anaconda; Eunectus murinus (Boidae). It is eaten. Associated with water; it helps shamans approach hot areas when they are looking for a pei mi ãmo.. wãikoyãriwe.

I want to eat with meat. ya re naikare.

to eat meat or fish. naikam.

tree species Duguetia cauliflora (Annonaceae). cauliflora.

sudden and violent pain. uri-.

while his mother-in-law was hurrying to split long thin sticks to place on the roof, he went to get (cutting them with his nails) leaves (to cover the roof). pe yesini hurohuro e ki kea ha ropareni, yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini.

to cut/collect multiple objects with the nails (perfective aspect of the durative verb). tirirarei.

to refuse to answer, to refuse to speak. wãhã hayumai.

to do repeatedly, to do in several opportunities. hayumai.

to stir up the fire. koã ãsho tikuku.

we dispersed slowly and when we walked in parallel rows, we stopped. yamaki mi opi yoããherima, yamaki mi ha yoikuni, yamaki uprat a r i y o m a.

to disperse, to spread out (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããherima.

the hair (plural). hethãnãuku.

fruits of the pasho ãhuhi shrub (plural). pasho ãhuku.

plural marker. uku.

As Amoãyoma wants to be under it, the leaves of the tree of songs beautify it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro, pei ke hena noshi re hariape ye.

feminine spirit associated with the ãmoã tree. Amoãyoma.

the cassava plants fell uprooted. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

fallen, uprooted. poruprawe.

pair of cane tubes worn in earlobes. purima hiki.

as he had returned home enraged, he left the package (that was cooking on the embers) to burn. a hushuoripi ha koponi, e hãro ishimarema.

left to burn. ishimarema.

to be locally reddened by the sun (durative 2). hetetou.

to defeat (in a game, in a fight). kanaprai.

they climbed (the mountain) and, as they were climbing, Kasima felt dizzy. pe yãmothema, pe ha yãmothoni kasima a V.

go look for your father (on the plain, at the foot of the mountain). haahe ke a nape ta kuthoheri.

implies a linear downward movement (or the reverse), to descend following a straight line, to march in a line, to place oneself at the foot of a tree, etc.. -tho.

to become beautiful, splendid. wãrishanaai.

lie here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

lying in opposite directions (with the head next to the feet of the other) in a hammock. yotekei.

blunt. pohotowe.

the malefic spirits (yai) were becoming numerous, it is said. yai the pe ma manikou tehe, a harayoma.

malefic spirits. yai-.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they scattered the objects, and then they scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter objects, spread them out on the ground. yapikiai.

to place at the base of, to put underneath, to bring down. kotheai.

do not group together. pe tishoshatihe.

a large number of termites swarmed in the water. mãu u hami komi konaki tishoshama.

compact group. tishoshorayou.

to fold twice. wapureprai.

formed, developed (protuberance, swelling, etc.). orãpirãyou.

you have yellow urine. wa niaasi frãre.

to become yellow, to acquire a yellowish and sickly tint. frãrãi.

he had caught fish and was carrying the bundle on his back. yuri e ki yokerarema e hãro ha yehireni.

to catch a fish. yokerei.

to be agitated by the wind. shurishurimou.

starry (sky). shitikaripi.

not to sleep during the night. fmamo he wakarai.

at dawn Rabipelado left the collective dwelling. nãro re a horeprarou he wakarai yaioma (mit.

1. To be in a certain place or situation, until dawn. 2. To make it until dawn.. wakaka.

he shouted to call the others because he no longer remembered the path. ai the pe rii ha a komima, yo puhi hatukeprai ha maoni.

not remember anymore (something concrete and specific). hatukeprai.

(they heard) the cries of the ancestors traversing running through the central plaza of the house. poreri pe miã kãi rerepeherima, yahi hami (mit.

they traversed running through the central plaza of the house. rerepeherima.

let's cross the river there to take the old path. mihi re u ha pemaki ha pekatuikuni, ihi re yo tusi hami pemaki kuparekirio.

old path/trail (path that is starting to close, path invaded by vegetation). pekatuikuni.

send your mother to harvest corn where that tree whose top protrudes (in relation to the surrounding vegetation). kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami e moku nape ta shimiki.

to have the protruding tip (in height). shorokoa.

to make faces. wãrihothomou.

to begin to rub against, smear, stain, dirty by rubbing with the hand or a pointed object. hãhiprai.

domesticated ground dove. yakofe.

1. hetoshi: 1. To be worn out, frayed, damaged (a rope, a cord, a strap). Estar gastado, deshilachado, raído o dañado (una cuerda, un cordel, una correa). It is also said of a fruit that has lost its skin after friction. Se dice también de una fruta que ha perdido su envoltura después de una fricción. 2. 2. To be dirty with earth (southern Orinoco speech). Estar sucio de tierra (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to deteriorate, fray (lace, strap), wear out. hetoshiai, inc.

worn out, frayed, damaged. hetoshi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). tãrãimi.

to suddenly lie down on the ground. praprakei.

to become dense (vegetation); to become obstructed. paimirayou.

wing (the bone and flesh). fãtãtãmãpi.

"Come to get us. "yamare ta koreyo. ", they shouted. ", pe komima.

come to get us/them. koreyo.

to be at a higher level, to put above. yutehe.

the people of his community. kama theri.

he is a member of my community. kamiye theri ke a.

community, member of a local group. trontheri.

(an animal) shakes itself (when wet). t yomisiprou.

shake (something wet, like a wet animal or dog). yomisi.

it is narrow (it is too narrow for me to insert it). the hoki.

narrow, too narrow (with respect to an object that one wants to insert). hoki.

to receive a large quantity. peheripei.

to pile up, to accumulate. heruyutumai.

the surroundings of the river. paiwa.

his eyes examined everything carefully. the mamoku moyaweaprarou ha yaiikuni.

to move around cautiously, to walk while being on guard. moyaweaprarou.

to disperse to make a search or hunt. ãkoko.

his/her eyelids swelled. mamokaki warepiai.

to swell (eyelids). warepiai.

the hasupi frog lives in shallow burrows. hasupi a kotekea.

shallow burrow. kotekea.

variety (of banana). -rorei.

they shot numerous arrows and the noise they made when falling was heard. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

noise produced by numerous arrows falling to the ground. thohuthohumorayou.

I was still walking on the path when night fell on me. pei yoka hami ya huu shoao tehe ya he ka komãrayoma.

night fell. komãrayou.

to have carried to land several objects that were in a canoe or in the water. washiriamakei.

mientras él estaba colgado cabeza abajo de un algarrobo, Mujer-oso hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas alrededor de la plaza central. ãro kohi ha a mi wereo tehe, teperiyoma a rii tiwaroa shoarayoma (mit.

curve. tiwaro.

he broke his arm with a stick. kama poko yahekirema.

to break an elongated object by striking it. naprushini.

to burn the interior of a canoe to produce the separation of the edges. hithotheprai.

he started unraveling some fibers from the end of his hammock (and said): "Mother-in-law. thoo thoku he kushesheprai ha shoaroni.

to start unraveling, untwisting, or unraveling. kushesheprai.

to become deep. okoprou.

protruding navel (offensive). fyimotha poyoyowe.

navel, belly button. fyimo.

hi. wãyuwãyu.

he is afraid. misi ãkiãkimo.

to be afraid. ãkiãkimo.

to let a substance lose its effect or flavor through negligence. okeamai.

be attentive while you walk. a ta moyaweaheri.

to make someone prudent, attentive. moyaweamai.

water bird, cotara caracolera; Aramides cajanea (Rallidae). koshekã.

I did not make a mistake when I thought they could afflict me by killing one of my relatives. yare puhi kãi perimapou tao ya puhi ma re kuu katitiowei.

to afflict by killing a relative. katitiowei.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonamini poo a ha hokereni, moro a pahetiprarema.

I found (picked up) an old arrow in the forest. urihi hami shereka hote ya hokerema.

to find, to pick up (an object). hokeai.

noise produced by the fall of many arrows shot at a target. taitaimou.

to have arched/curved something upwards. yãprekekei.

to bend or arch the lower back when feeling pain. yapreke.

He/she is not there. Amo naika.

to be absent, to not exist. naika.

to replace or succeed under. pepipraai.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is curved. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to curve, to bend into an arc shape. payokoprou.

the two children immediately plunged into the rapids. pora a hami ihiru ke kipi nihoroã shoapariyoma.

to slide down, to slip down, to plunge into water. nihoroã.

to get on top of. hetuai.

there where the ãri ãhi tree rises, I will establish my plantations, in that place I will live. ãri ãhiki re uprayahi, ya ãhiki ka thai ha kuparuni, ya motoreo ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

1. To describe a circle while advancing. 2. To be, to live (in a certain place), to inhabit (gracefully, in a ceremonial dialogue). motoreo.

Tucán flew in turn towards the broken liana that was still swinging, and clung to it. thotho yãteyãtemou shoao tehe mayepirithawe a yeteprapariyoma.

he clung to it. yeteprapariyoma.

and. y.

we went out of the water quickly and then, in a place where they went to eat yagrumo fruits, we found freshly cut branches. rope yamaki ha hashiripraikuni, kepo iki re wanowehei, ihi mohe yoa tute.

as he knew tobacco, he immediately knew what it was about. pee nahe tai yaia yaro e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to do something quickly or immediately. hashiripraikuni.

tell someone to work in the fields. hikari-momai.

where did (he/she/it) go. weti hami a huherima.

where did (he/she/it) go?. huherima?.

to have a slightly reddish tone, to have reddish reflections (locally). wahehea.

to pretend not to know (perfective form). mohotumorãyou.

to have a beard. fkaweiki weuhuwe.

beard. fkaweiki.

to be beautiful, splendid (durative). wãrishanai.

to listen, to have been informed. yimikai.

I will scratch you a lot. pe iprushimararei.

to scratch or claw someone. iprushiamai.

to put completely yellow, dye or paint completely yellow. ashimam.

to acquire this yellowish hue locally; to paint or dye locally with a yellowish color. frãihikei.

don't insist on proferingthreats (= stop threatening all the time). a wã tetea he heyatiparuhe.

insist on doing something despite opposition or warnings. heyatiparuhe.

to sleep deeply. sutao.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw mucus). hushihipii.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). orãmisiwe.

the house of the enemies (lit. fira ke makayopi o kithanari ke makayopi.

piles of rocks. makayopi.

he carried embers/firebrands. koa wake ki re tetaoheriiwei.

he carried embers/firebrands. tetaoheriiwei.

to get congested, to get stuffed up. hokoãi.

to sneeze. esikamo.

to have been perforated in several places (resultative state). wareshano.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

formed a deposit. papeheoma.

nevertheless, he fell into the water. pe kea he yatipariyoma.

he fell into the water. yatipariyoma.

the women burst into laughter. suwe ke pe shoaproturou.

to make laugh a lot, to make burst into laughter. shoapramai.

when you put your hand as a visor. wa huko si ha yohooni.

to put the hand as a visor to look into the distance. yohooni.

you can see that they have not flowered. fei si ma re prokore.

have flowered. prokore.

that is far away, downriver. the he yatheheakirioa.

far away, at a great distance. yatheheakirioa.

to keep someone awake, not let them sleep. hihirimapou.

to become pot-bellied, to become big-bellied. makasiai.

I'm going to take this woman as wife. ya amishi ta koo sho.

to take a wife (specifically for the wayamou ceremony). famishi.

to hang a hammock in a tree by tying it between two branches. puuai.

to hang a hammock in a tree by tying it between two branches. puuai.

they took along the one who lived in this hearth. hei ke yãnopi re kui, a pararureherii kuhe.

they took him/her along. pararureherii.

woman who has become sterile due to shapo. shapopirayou.

I cannot walk fast when the pain I have in my thigh becomes more intense. naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

intermittent pain, pain that becomes more intense at times. poru.

to go under the shade repeatedly, to go under the shade one after the other. ahipraai.

a dirty mirror. umokoyoripi co.

dirty superficially, opaque. ukosi.

they had sex with their daughters many times, they committed numerous incests. pe thee pe rii hami ka pe wamoma, pe yaweremou heparohooma.

to commit incest. yaweremorayou.

to consume gradually in successive moments. watheprai.

(I tell) my brother-in-law: "Go with your dog to kill agoutis". heriye ke a hore re kui ha.

my brother-in-law. heriye.

Eat banana. Wake maki.

eat. maki.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me greatly. he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

to have been filled or to have been filled to the brim. rahoa.

they kindled the fire. koa wake pe yarea shoapemahe.

they kindled the fire. shoapemahe.

to carry a child on one. ãyorimapou.

His skin is still stuck on (downriver). e siki rukea shoaa kurakiri.

to be situated at a distance downriver. rakiri.

the two women were walking covering their noses. suwe ke kipini hiyoka kahupraroma.

to cover the nose. kahuo.

to maintain an embrace. waporopou.

post that supports the roof of a shapono that is not aligned with the others. mi tharihiwe.

to save someone. tharihi.

to paint several circles on someone or something (perfective, plural object). tipikirarei.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

bad. puﬁ.

to be piled up, to be stacked. heruyutuwe.

what kind of fruit are you eating. hihimo wai kure.

incision made to a fruit to remove a damaged part. hikoremai.

See prukima. pukuye ãsi.

See prukima. pukuye.

when the fire crackles, it would be said that it is the warapa resin that is burning. wake koraramou tehe hawe warapa kokoki kuwe.

1. To gurgle, to splash, 2. To have borborygmi, to produce intestinal noises. koraramou.

line up here. heyeha ke wamaki ha masisoni.

to line up side by side (with faces in the same direction). masisitou.

mihi wake the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa (mit. mihi wake the ki re kui, the ki ta hiprao, ya the ki ta wapa (mit. ): those ripe fruits over there, give them to me for a moment so I can taste their flavor (lit. ): esos frutos maduros, allá, dámelos un momento para probar su sabor (lit. : so that I can taste them). : para que los pruebe).

give for a moment. hiprao.

to start shortening. hokataprai.

to twist, to coil, to curl up. krete.

the Yanomami would want to kill me to take possession of my wife. yãnomãmi the pe wãrini yare shei puhi ha topraoheni.

to seize, take possession of (a woman whose husband was killed, prey from a predator). toproaheni.

itheripou: to transport a load thus increased. itheripou: transportar una carga así aumentada.

to transport. transportar.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kuniã.

to blacken the body completely by rubbing it with hands coated in dye. hipio.

to blacken the body completely by rubbing it with hands coated in dye. hipio.

they will not scold me. nowã raye.

to scold. raye.

to have screamed in desperation or panic. eaimorayou.

to feel nauseous. kamishi yoruhuwe.

to feel nauseous, to feel sick, to feel dizzy. yoruhuwe.

to have started to surpass (in height). toreherayou.

to eat rapidly. wãkewãkemou.

to deform. deformarse.

upstream speech (referring to a group of Yanomami communities living upstream on the Puutha Ke U river). paraﬁri.

lagoon that has been reduced due to persistent drought. thookorowe.

to split. kaheki.

wild plant (unidentified); cultivated plant, lairén; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). popoa.

the ancestor joined the others to go to the party. poreri the iriamou mi hua nareroni.

to go somewhere with a specific purpose. nareroni.

to heal oneself from sickness. puhi yãnomãmiai.

to heal oneself. yãnomãmiai.

1. to separate (skin of a fruit, bark of a root or tree) 2. to skin, to flay (an animal). tiprokoai.

the pain prevents me from moving. no wãri kiwema mai.

it prevents me from moving. kuaapimi.

nearby streams. yehihi.

what can be cut into pieces. tipuramou.

(negative prefix). heo.

he inhales a hallucinogenic drug and attacks/kills his enemy's spiritual force (pei no uhutipi). epena wa re ukukuãrãreiwei, a no uhutipi wãri ta sheri.

to inhale a hallucinogenic drug and attack/kill someone. ukukuãrãreiwei.

(myth): the arrow canes sprouted in a scattered way and the people of the Scattered Toucans fell in love with them. hi re toarakirihei (mit.

it is planted in a spaced out manner. the tia no shorororegw e.

dispersed, scattered (referring to plants or fruits coming from certain palm trees). shuhuhuru.

to inform, to tell someone where something is located. hemikei.

I will pass by here again when the sun is at that point in the sky. kiha mothoka ke a kutou tehe, ya hayua kopariyo.

look, when the sun is at that point, I will pass by here again. mamo ta shatiiku, eyeha the kutou tehe ya hayua kopariyo.

to pass, to go by. kopariyo.

the hallucinogens are mixed (= it is a mixture of hallucinogens). epena pe heshihiwe.

to mix, blend. kone.

to stop being straight, to bend, to curve, to become winding (often referring to an arrow). ethethai.

woodpecker, yellow-crested woodpecker (Picidae family). epephilus melanoleucos (Picidae).

woodpecker. epephilus.

they kicked the excrements. kohoromi shipe kayoamahe.

to kick, reject or displace with the foot. kayorei.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to remain lined up for a long time. rãyotao.

a strong stomach ache after a shock or after receiving a blow. yoothoprarei.

to start breastfeeding. aka hesi keo.

to breastfeed (a baby). aka hesi ke.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for their house then. kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe.

inhale hallucinogens. enamou.

he fell under the weight of the load, and remained crushed under it for a long time. a ha sheikuni a hikitao heatima (mit.

to have been compressed, flattened; to have remained pressed under an object for a long time. hikirei.

me voy a bañar. ya yãrimou.

me voy a hacer pintar líneas si-. ãiwe ke iha ya oni eyekamou.

past completed form. morãyoma.

sit here. a ta roikiyo.

he went quickly to hide behind the trees and immediately called the human beings. pei ke yo ha yetu ke the pata ha wariripraikiyoni, yãnomãmi the nakai shoaoma.

to go towards (a location). -ikuyo.

to not stay in one place (funny or joking). wetihou.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. wa wake ha paramapani.

to light a fire in the central plaza. paramapei.

malaria. paludismo.

to be slightly curved (wall of an object). wãhetea.

eufemismo para anunciar la muerte de determinada mujer (lit. pukuye ãsi mashi rukea.

correa que sirve para llevar a los bebés. remashi.

to drink. wakaroarei.

to walk carelessly, without looking around, often with the gaze turned towards the ground. teiprou.

the fish did not delay in jumping out of the water and also it can be The word 'yetu' in Yanomami means 'child'. yetu yuri ke ki homoma.

he did not take long to start climbing the Poncha mountain. yetu ke a kãi yãmoo re kuketayonowehei.

the tobacco grew very quickly and flowered. yetu re nahe ha patarini, a raroma (mit.

fish (plural). yetu.

to be afraid. wiiwiimi.

give them food (ceremonial dialogue). ke ki ni ta hikãhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to feed a very young child by chewing food and giving it mouth-to-mouth; to feed in the mouth (jokingly, during a ceremonial speech). hikããi.

(antonym of aka porepiai). aka ta.

to hang. he ãtete.

to be twisted locally, to be twisted only at one point. torokou.

I first caught the fish by shooting them with arrows, then I killed them with a machete. sherekani yuri ya pe tiwehai parioma, siparani ya pe tuyei mahioma.

then, after that. mahioma.

Mujeroso hormiguero, whose pubic hair was even visible from behind (because it was so abundant and long), was her mother-in-law. teperiyoma e weshi pe he re hapramonowei, pe yesi e kuoma (mit.

to have pubic hair growing. weshii.

he speaks frankly, without hiding what he thinks. moro ahetea a wai hikooma.

frankly, without hiding what one thinks. hikooma.

prohibit; tell someone not to participate in a fight or war (say it once). wapekai.

go lie down over there in front. a ta periikuhuru.

to go and do something upriver or in front. ikuhuru.

I have gotten blisters on my hand. ya imiki yotihirariyoma.

to get blisters. yotihiprou.

to be thin (due to illness). hayapishi.

a small recent vine was hanging along (the hole) where Rabipelado had taken refuge. nãro a re titia totihiawei ha, ihami thoo ke e thotho wai tuku re wariripeheriiwei (mit.

to hang or be hanging along something in the same direction. totihiawei.

he stays in the house and spends time sleeping. a mitao heatii.

to stay in the house and spend time sleeping. heatii.

they approached immediately and set fire to the palm leaves. ke kipi ukua re shoakeiwei, masiko ke ki wake piyemapikema.

they set fire to the palm leaves. piyemapikema.

"sokã, sokã. "sokã, sokã. " (onomatopoeic sound). ".

onomatopoeic sound. sokã.

to strip off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pahathoai.

abscesses or boils. yuupirayou.

I put a lid on the pot. hapoka ya si ka he kahuai.

He slowly took off the big stone he had hanging around his neck, and plugged the hole with it. maa ke ma pata opi hayuu ha kuparuni, a ka kahua shoakema.

to close, obstruct, plug an opening. kahua.

to take something out of someone. yahatotoprawe.

hide. shãho.

to develop small warts. simopiãi.

cuando ustedes limpien la parte del conuco invadida por la maleza, las espinas de la planta kãmoãrima los rasguñarán y chorrearán sangre. wamaki yasikope hami kãmoãrima peni wamaki i yepe rukekotii kukei.

part of a garden cleared of weeds. yasika.

they immediately threw out fragments of the sipara rock (hitting it). sipara keki ãshãkãri yutuhamai shoapariyoma (mit.

to throw out, expel, eject, make jump far away. yutuhamai.

to put water in a container. huyukou.

certainly we will go to war with you. pemaki niyape ke.

to go to war, to fight. niyape.

(The example sentence is incomplete, so no translation is provided. mamokori ke a yauope ha ripuhusiriwe ke a wai ha yeteprai.

to lean abruptly against a vertical surface, to lean quickly against a vertical object (to go unnoticed). yeteprai-.

Jaguar put himself slowly in a crouching position (and said): "I will never find my way back". irariwe ke a ha roaruni: "ya no katitipropi mai ke".

to put slowly in a crouching position. roaruni.

the wasp nest whose (tubular) opening is curved. kopina moroshi re payokoi.

curved, hooked, having the shape of an arc. kuyahi.

to make vomit. kamishi yoru.

to vomit. yoru-.

a great yellow flame runs over the ground. pitha a wake pata frãre re rererihe ye.

run towards the place where they killed the effigy. no owe ke a re shei herahe, iha ke pe ta rereri.

to run, to move quickly. rereri.

to lie down face down on the floor (in a hammock, on a branch, etc.). yarehotou.

both resurrected without anyone's help. yãmi ke kipi horiprariyoma (mit.

he immediately made the call to the hekura (and said): "I make my dog resurrect". a tutomou shoaoma: "ipa yaro ya horiprai ta kuparu" (mit.

to revive, to heal, to make resurrect (after a shamanic healing). horiprai.

to crawl or be crawling on the ground. shaio.

to have become curved, to have taken the shape of an arc. payokorayou.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepirayou.

to run after someone, to chase someone. nosi rereamai.

to run after someone, to chase someone. reremarei.

that which is not edible (and is thrown away); object that is in such a state that it must be discarded. hoyamou.

I will mix the aphrodisiac kumi with the bark of the mãrã sihi tree and use it to seduce her. kumi ya rii fa feshiprarini, mãrã ya siﬁ fa feshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

to seduce (a woman). feshiprarini.

because of Bachaco, his mother-in-law got lost and metamorphosed. ko yeri we pe yesi a ha yakemarini a shi wãrihipramarema.

to get lost, lose one. ake.

she cooked cassava bread and put them in a mapire. nashi ﬁki ha rãmirãrini yoroﬁ si ha ﬁki thaprarema.

put in a mapire (basket). thaprarema.

hard, rigid, stiff. yihiti.

to throw down, to drop from above. kemai.

I won't separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I'm going downriver to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

make rattling noises (of metal objects colliding, especially pots being carried; poles being dragged along the ground). teeteemo.

to hold someone while another person hits them. huwetai.

transport strap too long (was made that way). preyukuwe.

I unbalance it (duration). mi eotamai.

to unbalance a container by loading it more on one side than the other. eotamai.

what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me. kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by pulling with the hand, exerting lateral pressure). hoyorei.

you do not request any goods. matohike wama ãhã poimi.

little brother, if there are chicks, we will claim one. oãsi kakara ihirupi ke pe kua ha, pehe a wãhã wãri pope.

to request, to claim, to solicit. poimi.

you are not going to divide what belongs to me. matohiye wama pe no shererai ma re mai.

to divide, separate into several parts. shererai.

They perform the paushimou ritual. Tha shiki paushimou.

paushimou. paushimou.

paipaimi: male paují bird, it is called that because of its cry (onomatopoeic). paipaimi: paují macho, se lo llama así por su grito (onom.

male paují bird. paipaimi.

acuesta al niño. ihiru a ta perimaki.

mi piel de arrendajo. ãyãkorãmiye ke siki kãi.

my piel de arrendajo. ãyãkorãmiye.

this will loosen (= this will come undone). the prohoai.

to loosen, to be loose, to tie loosely. prohoai.

to be lying in a hammock that sags and is too deep. kuyahi.

¿qué será lo que hay dentro de esa cesta. hei weti ke the pe rii thari.

poner algo en una cesta. thari thai.

basket. thari.

chirriar los dientes. eieimou.

wake up the young people, see that it becomes day again. ihiru pe, pe ta hokekou haitaru, pe the haruu koo ke a re kuimi.

his vigilance gave way when day approached (he fell asleep and) snored. pe the haru oweai totihioimai tehe, a puhi ha mrataruni, a hohoruãmoma.

to become day, dawn. haru.

he killed two paujíes one after the other. paru-horokotori a horohoprarema.

he killed two animals or two enemies during the same expedition. horohoprarema.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for their house then. kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe.

inhale hallucinogens. enamou.

to open, to separate (like the petals of a flower). watetai.

(he) responded immediately to Titiri's whistle call. titiri kasi ã wãri hirirayou ha a kasi ã nokaprariyo.

swelled, inflated, dilated (perfective form). hirirayou.

to pull down the lower eyelid. mamo kasiki yorere.

to pull down. yorere.

to paint red with annatto, to become red. momihi.

while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk. ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei.

they inflated. hirimapii.

to tear or rip lengthwise (durative aspect). sherirou.

to rise momentarily on tiptoe. iteshetou.

there, downstream, in the place where they habitually fish. kihi koro totihi ha, yuri pe re kãprããi totihiowehei ha.

the place where they habitually fish. totihiowehei.

I cleaned it completely. ya the auprarema.

cleaned it completely. auprarema.

to hold firmly, to sustain with firmness. rohothopou.

to hold firmly, to sustain with firmness. rohothopou.

a great yellow flame runs over the ground. pitha a wake pata frãre re rererihe ye.

run towards the place where they killed the effigy. no owe ke a re shei herahe, iha ke pe ta rereri.

to run, to move quickly. rereri.

to produce waves. turereai.

she was going from one side to the other and her laughter was always heard moving with her. kihami ke a he reshiprope hami, the ikãwã kãi he reshiproma.

stay still (or else, you'll see what happens). pe he ta reshipro (antífrasis).

to go from one side to another, not to stay still. reshiproma.

to weaken or cause to die. sheprou.

I am tired. mããri thotho.

to be tired. mããri.

to respond favorably to a request for something. hitam.

to heat food. yotamai.

coithãã: to rest on the ground (an empty container). coithãã: reposar sobre el suelo (un recipiente honmo tenían miedo (de él), los antepasados no se do).

to rest. reposar.

to make (someone) splash once. fhamishiamai.

one does not deny anything to a father-in-law. pe shii the pe iha the pe shi imamou taomi.

to tell someone not to give something. imamomai.

to twist, to coil around something. kare.

a type of small bird, possibly a woodpecker or tinamou. yoparawe.

1. to tighten a bowstring by twisting it; 2. for a bowstring to be tightened. hãto nahitha peti.

the cacao trees leaned due to the burning heat. pohoro ke hiki wai teihia ha yaiparuni.

due to the burning heat. yaiparuni.

we spent the night eating the remains of the váquiro (accompanying it with plantains). ware yama pe shee re tehitehimou he harutima.

to eat something accompanying it with another food. tehitehimou.

when you have recovered your strength. wa hihutou hititio tehe.

to recover strength. hihutou.

the woman hung herself from a tree and, when Danta passed underneath, she kicked him. hii ke hi kuope ha suwe a ha yautaruni shamariwe ke a pata pepihitou tehe.

to hang or be hung upside down; to dangle. yautaruni.

these (trees) were inclined. nahi pe yotehepramoma.

to be inclined, leaning. yoteheprawe.

hit him quickly. wai shetai.

to hit quickly. shetai.

on the face of the old woman they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. suwe ke the pata mamo kasi wãri oniprai ha yairoheni.

eyelid; edge of the eyes. oniwei.

to finish putting water in a container. huyukuprou.

así dijo Tucán. mayepirithawe a kuu shoapariyoma (mit.

designates a hekura or a mythical ancestor. -rithawe.

lay down (perfective). hãkohokei.

to lie down with someone (iterative). hãkohotaai.

to lie down, to be lying down with someone in a hammock. hãkoho.

He has a big bruise. Puturãmãpi ama wake.

bruise, contusion. puturãmãpi.

you have an ugly head. wa he wãri towemi.

to be sick, to be in poor physical condition. towem.

he crosses again the threshold of the room bringing a large basket of fruits. momo ke pe pata thari ha yehireni, the horetou re korãyouwei.

a large basket of fruits. korãyouwei.

to succeed someone in an activity, to substitute someone, to take over from someone. notiprou.

dig here. heha ke theka ta thapraa.

sit here. heha a ta roik u.

you young people, come sit here (upriver dialect). ihiru pe, feha ke pe ta roikiyo.

here (at the place where the speaker is located). feha.

to be silent. matha waiwe.

to be silent. waiwe.

(he/she) hung a hook. fmãu ishakokei.

to hang or suspend something flexible and elongated. ishakokei.

to form a (or several) blister/s on the hand. fimiki si posho.

to break the shell of, to cause blisters. poshoam.

when we get tired of living in the jungle we return to the communal dwelling. yamaki periai ha mohipraruni yamaki kooma.

to live, to inhabit; to get into a hammock. peripra-.

he hurried to burn the bees with burning leaves, broke the nest, knocked it down, and descended sliding quickly along the tree trunk. yetu oi a ha hisikiparuhuruni, a ha poprarini, a ha kemarini, a sherorai ropai kukema.

he hurried to burn the bees with burning leaves. hisikiparuhuruni.

the two shapono are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the ancestor Monos capuchinos were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to be surrounded, to place one next to another (low and rounded objects). tipete.

I gave up taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

Because they did not want to give up, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to renounce, to give up, to abandon. tiraai.

the bees have stung me so much that my scalp hurts. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

the termites will hollow out the wood. ereerema kona shipeni hi si hororop r a r e i.

skull, cranium, scalp; shell (of a turtle, crab, cachicamo). ereerema.

my son, go knock down wapu fruits (by hitting the branches with a stick). pusi, wapu ke ki wai ta yayopra.

to knock down fruits by hitting branches with a stick (especially wapu fruits), to knock down an arrow stuck in branches by throwing pieces of wood at it; to notch the end of a piece of wood in order to split it by hitting it against the ground. yayopra.

I take beads (I grab a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to catch, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãorei.

I'm going to wash myself properly with soap (lit. moshimoshi peni ya ta yãrimou ta pashio sho.

foam. shimoshi.

to be forming breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). hãkãmiprou.

high riverbank carved by the current. hishio no.

high riverbank carved by the current. hishio.

to walk until dawn. harurayou.

1. to have a vertigo, a dizziness 2. to lose all point of reference, to get confused, to not recognize oneself 3. to regularly get vertigos. mi pe shiwãrihi.

the ancestors transformed into sloths. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

to transform, to change. ifama.

path located on a mountain slope. fyo tiwarowe.

path located on a mountain slope. tiwarow.

They (two) spread epidemics in an extensive region. no wãri a aka praukumapii shoaoma.

extensive area, vast surface, extensive region. praukua.

I'm going to look for shawarakurimi fruits. shawarakurimi ya ki toai.

edible fruit of the shawarakurimi tree, harvested often in large quantities during the rainy season. shawarakurimi.

I told him: "above all, do not touch the magic plants (those that make sick or kill)". yaithakarawe wa the pe hurii mai.

magic plant. thakarawe.

to break a limb. yaheki.

Provides good wood for firewood. ahotonawe kosi hi.

tree; Gustavia sp. (Lecythidaceae). ahotonawe.

skin put to dry. hithorema.

to receive leftovers at one's home. sheepei obras a su casa.

to receive leftovers. sheepei.

Assist the departure of people who are leaving in a canoe. karemarei.

to bend or fold it. he itutu.

her daughter appeared, the diadem and the red cotton made her splendid. pe thee a re petariyowei, watoshe peni the no aimoma, mathono peni the no aimoma.

splendid, magnificent. petariyowei.

por más que tú pienses "yo tengo un viejo fusil remendado con un alambre". hei kopetaye ya wãri ãrãprepi ta thaporani.

wire. ãrãprepi.

to perforate, to pierce, to bore (once). sho.

son-in-law. hesiyopi.

to be afraid. ikeketorewe.

to be rigid under the effect of an effort. hirarakei.

while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk. ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei.

they inflated. hirimapii.

to pluck a handful of feathers; to singe the hair of an animal before gutting it. hukukurei.

I rub the wapu fruits against the bottom of a basket. wapu ya ki hipii.

to rub toxic fruits against the wall of a basket after soaking them for some time. hipri.

he did not delay in reaching the path of Aparecido, then he walked on a plain. pore re a no mayo hami yeture e he hapraoma, a he yaripekir i o m a.

to walk on a plain. he yari.

over there, downstream, there were two (people), and I suddenly noticed them. eyemi, koro ha, porakapi the kipi kuoma, ya mamo shatiprakema.

to suddenly catch sight of, to suddenly notice. shatiprakema.

to kill many animals during a hunt. yohumoray.

I am crippled with pain. yã mi no hore re wayuhi thawei.

to be crippled. thawei.

bone that breaks into pieces and can be used to make harpoon points for arrows. tikaropramou.

to keep close. ahetepou.

to fold, to pleat (once on itself) the edge of something, to hem a fabric. koheãi.

1. A species of large scorpion (unidentified (animal, plant)). 2. A character in mythology, representing an excellent archer, good hunter and good warrior. Uhutima reached the Moon with his arrow at the moment it was about to escape behind the clouds. The blood of the Moon spread over the earth giving birth to the warriors.. ayamawe.

to shake the hand once to get rid of something, to shake the hand once to splash someone or something, to vigorously shake an object held with the fingertips to remove something from it (especially to remove excess ash from tobacco leaves when preparing a chew). yomisãi.

I wanted to accompany him. yamaki tuve ganas de acompañarlo.

to want. yamaki.

do not inhale those leaves (= the leaves of those plants), they belong to the Yawari (if you inhale them) they will blow malefic substances over you. hena pe koai mai, yawari pe yããpi hena, kama peni wa thaprereihe.

they will blow malefic substances over you. thaprereihe.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved/twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

whose opening is twisted/curved. toyeketaparuni.

to have the face turned. mi huruo.

to have the face turned. huruo.

Yoawe's penis sound and also it can be The word 'moroshi' in Yanomami means 'son'. yoawe moroshi heã.

soft, tender, flexible. moroshi.

Bat coveted his mother-in-law's pubic hair (lit. pei weshi pe ha heweriwe a puhi waioma (mit. : Bat desired his mother-in-law's pubic hair). ).

to desire, to covet, to envy. waioma.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood close to each other, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

being close to each other. shirikirãyou.

who has inclined the palm spade where my kashuhuri seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yoteheai.

go to the other side (of the shelter). ai the mashi hami pe ta kuparu.

to be on the other side. kuparu.

give me your machete. siparahe a ta hiyo.

your machete. siparahe.

to go without ceasing from one side to the other. huoprou.

to be hungry. pakohe.

to be hungry. wãhewe.

the fruit of that tree. rerokotorawe akasi.

tree; Inga sp. (Leg., Mimosaceae). rerokotorawe.

fruit of the yawãshi hi tree. It is edible and is gathered during the dry season. yawãshi.

to advance, to progress zigzagging. hipoyeaprarou.

when the woman's belly exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to cut the end of a long object (by sliding a tool back and forth or applying blows from above). puru.

the two of them headed directly towards the prey. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to head directly towards (an enemy, prey, etc.). tiheriprou.

the two guests that I host have not closed their eyes all night. kipi re yãpouwei, ke kipi shimakamou he harutima una hoja a modo de embudo (para tomar el lí(habla del sur del Orinoco.

a leaf shaped like a funnel (for drinking liquids). yãpouwei.

to isolate a young girl during her first menstruation. ithãi.

hunter who participates in. heni.

don't protest or I'll kill you. wã wãri thatihe, pe sherei.

to threaten, to warn. thatihe.

to be hungry. hokeke.

se pintó la cara con onoto perfumado. hosho u peni a mi rii yãprãrema.

tree. nouhi.

to receive something that was harvested in that way. pahetipei.

to be or put oneself in the middle of a line of people moving, or in the middle part of a canoe. poushokupramou.

he feels jealous of his wife. pe suwepi a nohi harupou.

to feel lasting jealousy. harupou.

species (plural). spp.

"little do we care that they built their house apart", we said. "pe the pe shaponomou ayao petao", yamaki kuma.

to have constructed, repaired or maintained a collective dwelling. shaponomorayou.

we put the arrow to dry (by the river bank). yama a mi shereka hai re kupeiwei.

some gallinetas (birds) came close (to the river bank). paruri ke ki ikupema.

in what direction is the river closer. weti ha pawara ke u ahetea kupe.

locative suffix indicating proximity to water or river. -pe.

in the places where the caterpillars were pressed together (on the tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook her packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a werereope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma (mit.

I arrived at a place where the kasha caterpillars were grouped (in parallel, one with the other). kasha ke a werereope hami ya warokema.

to be arranged in parallel, a strip of sand arranged parallel to the shore. wererea.

I am going to the forest. Uu oshi pei.

to go. oshi.

I raised my head for a moment (to see). ya mi re nonotariyowei.

I raised my head for a moment (to see). nonotariyowei.

of no use to you to be agitated: you will not return to that region (= you will be killed) (feigned threat during a presentation dance). wa kuaai ma kui, urihi wa kapai koomi.

of no use to you to be agitated. wa kuaai ma kui.

to decorate an object or a person by imprinting a hand painted with colorant. raokoai.

it seems that the people of Shãshãnãwe made them cross the river at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami shãshãnãwe theri pe ãhã pekakuamatayomahe.

it seems they made them cross the river at the Karepe rapids. pekakuamatayomahe.

he had placed the blowgun vertically on a rock and kept it hidden on the Mountain-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. rihu ke a ha tikemakini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma (mit.

to place a long object vertically on top of another, or in continuation of another; to sit on top of; to seat a child on top of a load in a carrying basket to transport them in that way; to tell someone to position themselves in a canoe. tikeamai.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri.

a mountain name. rihuma.

go back (return to your home). a ta kopoheri.

to return home. kopoheri.

to be reddish. wakehe.

don't look at others while hiding. a mi yeheatihe.

to peek, to spy, to observe stealthily. yeheai.

to carry a single object from a canoe or water to land. washiriamai.

for a fledgling to start growing its first feathers. makutupiai.

grow first feathers. makutupiai.

to produce fear, to scare; to intimidate, to shame someone. kirimararei.

to begin to slit the abdomen of an animal (fish or mammal) to empty it. ekokoprai.

if I were a snake. ya oru kunoha.

expresses a conditional longing, realizable or not. kunoha.

dwelling (shapono). na.

being a child, I really woke up. the puﬁ moyawea totihirihe.

I woke up. totihirihe.

to extract a part from a whole, to divide, to distribute. pashihiai.

mother, come back to live here (with us). naye, the wãri peria ta komakiyo.

my mother. naye.

to have a hole. tiroshoa.

opposite of moyawe. mohotu.

they felt then a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to worry about someone. haruhai.

I too would have gone to visit, but unfortunately they prohibited me (lit. kamiye sho yahe a yahi mori mii ma kui, yare a wasia tikokei.

unfortunately. tikokei.

to speak in a low voice, to whisper. fwahato wã hai.

he said to her in a low voice "Shall I make love to you. a wã wahato wayoma "ya ta wamo sho. ". ".

in a low voice, whispering. fwahato.

"Quickly, bite me here on the inner thigh. "eyeha yare wãkumi ta wetipraa. ". ".

Bite me here!. wetipraa.

to guide, to teach, to show properly. shaririãmai.

a little dry. wehetihiwe.

when he arrives at another community, the effect of the pore henaki plant will cease abruptly. shomi theri pe rii ha a koprou tehe, pore henaki wayu hetirayou.

to cease (the effect of a hallucinogen). wayu hetiai.

the nearby communities. fahete theri.

vicinity, neighborhood, nearby communities. ther.

come here quickly to strike. heyeha the ta tuyepraayo she.

to collect honey (by striking to open the nest). fpuu tuyei.

to strike, to hit. tuyepraayo.

to prepare a substance to make it effective; to prepare a violent poison; to make tobacco spicy by preparing it properly. wayuprai.

to be locally flat. semakehea.

to be hungry. wayaha.

to have the habit of going to blow malefic substances to the members of a particular community. horapraai.

what am I going to say then when I participate in the ceremonial dialogue at night. weti naha ke a wãri kuu puhio yaro, wa the ã rãmai ta ke.

ceremonial dialogue. wayamou.

to make scarce. esheshãkei.

I don't even have cooking banana to cook. ni siquiera tengo ocumo para cocinar.

cooking banana. ocumo.

small bird (unidentified) of vivid colors. koetekoetemi.

(he) smoothed quickly the foot of the horoeti tree. horoeti re hi pata koro re tãihitamarini.

smoothed (it) quickly. tãihitamarini.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

to become very angry (and . yorikiprou.

It is said that girls have their first period at the same time as these squirrels. Kario wayapashi.

small black squirrel; Sciurus granatensis (Sciuridae). kario.

to play by throwing objects at each other. sheyeyou.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the rear part of a canoe; to walk behind. korot.

the beloved child. ihiru nohio.

to love tenderly in a lasting way, to feel an intense and lasting affection; to tenderly love those who are no longer there. nohio.

he hid out of fear. kirikiri pe wayu ha a hitheoma.

to hide out of fear. hitheoma.

(one day) you will hear it said that we have killed some of our enemies (lit. "rafaka re pe hãwetekema fa tharei", wamaki yimika kuu totihiope.

to kill an enemy. hãwetekema.

while they were hurrying to make this, Rabipelado slipped surreptitiously behind the women's backs (to flee). wake ka thai noshi hariraaihe tehe nãroriwe suwe ke pe yaipe hami a hiririãprarou yaioma.

funeral pyre. hariraaihe.

to undergo the ritual of homicides. unokaimomai.

ritual of homicides. unokaimorayou.

tiny tick. shifeni.

the pubic hairs full of lice of the Female-Toucan flutter near me. ei mayepiriyoma pe no weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

pubic hair. weshiki.

teeth. hisha.

the man kept pressing Siroromi vigorously. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to continue pressing hard. ãkikipou.

to have a period (menstruation). yipi-mou.

to bend, to curve. payokoai.

the sky clears up again. the heão koã.

to clear up after the rain (the sky). heão.

in a place where the river was straight the otter started swimming again at the surface of the water. pe u shaririope hami proro ke a wãri urerou kooimama.

to swim at the surface of the water. kooimama.

to make someone give up. puhi remomai.

(related word). he yaharoko.

the. las.

to roll up in a spiral; to hem, to fold the edge of something. yapuremai.

they hung the woman's hammock below and the man's hammock above. pe heãropi e hiki hetumakemahe.

to hang hammocks one above the other. hetumou.

to squat to defecate (human, animal). thopohoai.

I will exterminate everything that lives in this region. ya the urihi si ahiaiwe.

I will exterminate everything that lives in this region. ahiaiwe.

headdress of the hekura made with the braided down of birds of prey. watoshe koimari.

they were going to offer themselves to the guatura of Yotenamariwe (they were going to their death). y o t enamariwe ke wiipi rukeope ha pe totoai yaiope.

guatura (mythological being). rukeope.

a seed that is a potent hallucinogenic substance. nen un grano que es una potente sustancia alucinógena.

hallucinogenic. alucinógeno.

vayan allí (ustedes dos) a preparar una mezcla de fruto del seje con agua. hoko upe ta yarupikutu.

ve a llevar al niño junto a (su madre), tiene miedo. ihiru a ta komakutu, a kirii.

away, at a distance. -tayo.

mal que no se cura. fyai.

being curved and raised (a normally flat object). yotataprou.

being curved and raised (a normally flat object). yotataprou.

the carrying strap stretched downwards. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downwards (terminative aspect). prayukuprou.

to become beautiful (plants in a garden, particularly plantains and cambur palms). tiririprou.

fruits of the kãrã ãshi tree. ãshihiki.

I crumble corn. yono ya mope hushishai.

to start crumbling or pulverizing with the fingers. hushishiprai.

cracked. krãkã.

to be cracked. hãthothowe.

ya que tienes la costumbre de obtener pendientes de otros, mételos en el lóbulo de mis orejas (= ofréceme esas piezas metálicas). wa no hutukapi teapra ma kutaeni, hei pei ya yimikaki ha a ta huupari.

earring. huupari.

to have gone down abruptly from a hammock. waheherayou.

to hurry up, to rush. haiki wasurarse, apurarse.

to do something with the intention of. haiki.

he stopped, thirsty, every time he passed near a hollow with dark and foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

stagnant water, contained in hollows and depressions. papramope.

to be a little dark. ruwehe.

obstruir un lugar. paimiãmãi.

when the Yanomami woman arrived at her house and also it can be The word 'yãnomãmi' in Yanomami means 'Yanomami (people)'. do a la mujer yãnomãmi, él llegó a su casa.

Yanomami. yãnomãmi.

to have an arrow ready to shoot on the bow. shereka maketarei.

to have an arrow ready to shoot on the bow. maketarei.

to rise up momentarily above. parotou.

to introduce badly, to close imperfectly, to not bury deep enough. hietitaai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). teshemo.

we dispersed slowly and when we walked in parallel rows, we stopped. yamaki mi opi yoããherima, yamaki mi ha yoikuni, yamaki uprat a r i y o m a.

to spread out, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããheri.

in a place where water was heard flowing below him, from his feet, he pierced the earth with his arrow. e naha motu re u pata shararamou re pepianowei ha, hãto nahini u hiwehama.

to be below, to be under. pepia.

to reach a state of excessive ripeness. opirãyou.

leaves that hang from the tip of their petioles. mahanishi.

to become unconscious, to faint, to be breathless after a shock. pekohomo.

to climb, to scale (an elevation, a tree). torekekei.

comerán carne (lit. wamaki yaropi wãri krothakrothamope.

borbotones. krothakrothamope.

to start to crawl (after having been motionless). yonirayou.

I remained ambushed for a short time, and nevertheless I already whistled calling you. ya remou no wãi tetehetou tehe, hiopehe yetu ke ware horomaihe.

to whistle. horomi.

they kept the banana shoots piled up on Mount Mãiyo. mãiyo ke ki ha kuratha sipe hirapomahe.

he left his tobacco quid on the handle of the stone axe. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma.

to keep, to conserve something in a position; to carry (on the back, in the hand, on the shoulder, etc.). hirapomahe.

it was him who let a tree fall on the path. kamani yo shemakema.

to fall on. shekei.

that I cover my head with that. ya e he ta yohotao totihio she.

to cover one. yohotou.

what will you get on the way. eshi ke wa te yuaheripe.

what will you get on the way. yuaheripe.

you, young people, come sit here. ihiru pe, feha ke pe ta roikiyo (habla de río arriba.

to sit for a moment, to sit after having been standing for a long time. rotou.

I do not take it into account, I persist. ya nape he prakehea ha totihiikuni.

to persist, to insist. totihiikuni.

The Guianan toucanet advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

Guianan toucanet (bird species). aroaromawe.

he pressed down stones (to cover the holes), but the water eroded the earth and made them fall. maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

to press down, to weigh down, to hold down with weight. hikiãprarai.

(he/she/it) starts to walk describing a curve (after walking in a straight line). shomi va shokeai.

to walk describing a curve. shokeai.

to shorten, to reduce (speaking of an arrow that, after receiving several impacts, breaks several times). hatakaprou.

Interjection expressing prohibition or negation. shi!.

a type of vessel or pot. bakei.

to move the head from side to side (in a sign of negation). yãwetetou.

to return to live in the shapono (after having lived in a camp in the jungle). ãmopei.

to have hunger for a certain time. wãheprao.

property of the hekura. ala.

to be happy. wakewerimi.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

to visit. fuma.

to fan the fire. yahuhupei.

noise made by a more or less hard object inside a rigid container when shaken: noise of lechosa seeds, noise of chicks in the egg when shaken, etc.. rokorokomo.

to make a medium-sized or rather large object (in relation to the usual size of the object in question). prowehamai.

we jumped into the water and swam. kopou.

falling into water, jumping into water. kopou.

has grown/risen. tirerayou.

I did not make a mistake when I thought they could afflict me by killing one of my relatives. yare puhi kãi perimapou tao ya puhi ma re kuu katitiowei.

to afflict by killing a relative. katitiowei.

falling one after another (fruits). shithããi.

to clean one. wamore.

my mother-in-law claims that the wapu fruits are (still) hard. yayeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai.

to solidify (something liquid). hihumai.

that is the reason why I do not want to be dead. yaro kahiki re keonowei the yãno pe si ahi nikerei.

to be. ahi.

pile up the dry tobacco leaves and then roll them into a ball to preserve them. pee nahe shi wãrihiprai.

to tangle, to roll up. shi wãrihiãmai.

to let food fall apart by negligence during cooking. kohihãmãi.

the sun is already declining. mothoka kaiwe waikiwe.

to be inclined, to be oblique, not to be perpendicular to the ground. kaiwe.

to be lined up, to be aligned. masisiã.

to finish stinking/rotting. hithãriprou.

twist, coil. himonemo.

to mix, to blend. feshihi.

to march slowly (reciprocal). kawehayou.

he really metamorphosed, and became a trogon tail white. a shi rii wãrihiprou katitia shoarayoma, kurekuremi a kuprariyoma.

trogon tail white. kurekuremi.

the foot of the tree. pei hi kothe.

at the foot of the tree. hii kothe ha.

they went around the rocky wall of the mountain at its base. pei maki kothe hami the pe ã y o r i m a.

base, foot. fkothe.

to tie, to bind, to fasten with a very tight knot or loop. prohohai.

the váquiros were approaching us. ware ke ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

I did not see (the enemy warriors) carrying the little girl (who they had just kidnapped). suweheri ya wãri yehia taprai ma re maoperei.

I was looking, the. ya mamo shatioma, rahaka ke peki re puruhuoperei.

It is a verb suffix indicating remote past imperfective aspect combined with epistemic modality. perahei.

the child likes to be carried. ihiru a yehio.

to carry on one. yehi.

to go. kute.

to be generous. shi ihita.

to dry up (pond, lagoon). wellover.

to surface. kapokoo.

the fire only ignited in one place. koa wake ayakema.

to ignite or catch fire in a specific location. ayakema.

to divide, to share (for giving). shekerekei.

to receive a large number or quantity of something. thethepei.

to cut the end of a long object (applying a downward blow with a sharp object). tihetiai.

peach palm fruit. rasha.

his mother-in-law went out several times through the opening situated about a meter long and the thickness of a thumb. pe yesi shikã hami ke a wãri re horetaaiwei.

to pass crouched underneath something, to walk crouched so as not to be seen. horei.

she has a baby at the breast. oshe a yakapou.

young, recent, new; baby, sprout; newly planted plant. oriﬁã.

he has large hooked nails. pei re the imisiki pe pata nohi reiprawe.

hooked, curved downwards. reiprawe.

1. Tear into thin strips the segments of palm leaves (to pass them through the earlobe). 2. Draw several lines on a colored background, cover with lines. tikekeprai.

1. to move away, go far away (intransitive verb), 2. to prune, cut branches (transitive verb). payo.

to be locally reddened by the sun. hetetea.

to turn around, to turn over. mi hatuo.

to turn around, to turn over. hatu.

(related word). shikeye.

he ate. ka komãkei.

to suddenly lie down on the ground. praprakei.

"although she is a woman, if they hit me, I do not move away". "hii hiki wãri yarikou ma kui, kamiye suwe ya ma kui ya tikukuimi".

not move away to avoid blows. tikukuimi.

the dog, big and beautiful, lay (dead) on the ground. hiima ke a pata wãrishanawe yeepraa yaioma.

beautiful, magnificent, splendid. wãrishanawe.

to beautify; to make an animal beautiful by feeding it well. riyeheprou.

to offer, to give. t topei.

to offer, to give. tope.

while he was sitting without moving, Yoawe (lit. wãrishewe ke a roa yãnikitou tehe, a mamo yeo tehe, suwe a tararema.

to do something without hurry, to remain calm. ãnikou.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei.

was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. harukuaprarou.

to sit on leaves. fkoroku pakoheo.

to place food on leaves (put on the ground). fni pakoheai.

to put something on leaves placed on the ground. pakoheai.

to wrap something for oneself. hãrorei.

to be deformed, twisted, hardened like leather (perfective, plural subject). prithothorariyo.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei (mit.

1. To climb a tree by clinging to the trunk with both arms. 2. To surround, encircle; to have a circular mark.. harukua.

have they killed one of my male relatives, have they made him disappear. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

to kill a man (lit. frahaka hãweteãi.

to shake a bamboo arrowhead laterally to remove it from the arrow shaft; to kill a man. hãwete.

go to look for arrow canes at the limit of the cane thickets. fhe wetiki: pl.

1. To border, limit (a surface) 2. To kill (said during a ceremonial dialogue). wetikei.

to stretch, to extend. ehethaki utu.

to become iridescent, shimmering. tererãi.

to mount on something to reach an object. hiyãhããi.

to present marks of several impressions (the ground). kãshikiprawe.

I was going to catch up with them quickly. rope ya pe nosi hurirema.

to reach, to catch up with. inosi.

I take beads (I pick a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to pick, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãoã.

I am the song of the passing Yoreshiãriwe spirit. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope e.

spirit associated with the yoreshiãmi bird. yoreshiãriwe.

to be wrinkled, crumpled; dented (in one place). wahihi.

not to be deep (the water level). etehewe.

to assign a limit, to put an end to an extension. kohoãmai.

to be happy. namonamorimi.

the base of its spines. pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

the base of its spines. ãtãripi.

snake. clelia.

all see, the night demon passes again. pe haikia.

to see. haikia.

to perforate, to pierce, to bore (once). sho.

what will you get on the way. eshi ke wa te yuaheripe.

what will you get on the way. yuaheripe.

to have itchy rashes. shihitipiai.

the tortoise retracted its head (into its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

retracted its head (into its shell). totihipoti.

I stopped taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

because they did not want to desist, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to renounce doing something; to stop doing what one used to do. tiraarei.

he wanted to make known his name (and said): "they are nai flowers, nai flowers. pe the pe ãhã wawepramai puﬁo ke yaro: "nai ke pe, nai. ". ".

to make known the name of someone or something. wawepramai.

the old man was dragged dead along the floor of the house. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

to drag a long object along the ground. iririrei.

to harden superficially (fruit, root or tuber cooked on the embers). si mononoãi, inc.

to harden superficially. si mononoãi.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

the people of Tayari shot their arrows from afar, many arrows that missed the target. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikaihe, pruka shereka ke ki tishikamahe.

a place name. Tayari.

to turn something halfway around, to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemiprou.

you were impregnated (lit. wa shipenarayoma.

you were impregnated. shipenarayou.

large white larva; Pelidnota chamaeleon (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). Parasite of cambur plants (unidentified (animal, plant)).. makoya.

post that supports the roof of a shapono that is not aligned with the others. mi tharihiwe.

to save someone. tharihi.

hole left in the mud by the beak of the green ibis when searching for worms. koromãri husi wãno ka.

green ibis bird (Mesembrinibis cayennensis). koromãri.

it is because the hekura guarantee the otter its protection. hekura peni proro ke a wãhã hayumapou yaro.

1. To be convinced of someone. hayupou.

to pile up, to heap up (fruits). pororoamai.

they are occupied. pe yapekewe.

to be occupied in personal tasks. yapekewe.

son, go gather wapu fruits (by hitting the branches with a stick). pusi, wapu ke ki wai ta yayopra.

to make something fall by throwing objects at it, to knock down an arrow stuck in a tree by throwing things at it. yashishi.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

I do not work. ya ohotamou maa ke a kure.

negation. ma.

to hang at a low height. tiroroprou.

he had his big mouth open and his breath stank. the kahiki pata ha rereoni the mishiãki ni no wãi rishiwei kunomai.

to stink, to give off a foul odor. rishiwei.

I accompany the others downstream to the garden. ya ta hu nareokiri sho.

go to see with the others where the fruit is harvested. the ta mipraai ta nareohe.

they go to camp in the forest to eat morã fruits. ma nape shurukouhe.

they asked me to go with them and I accompanied them. ware ha nakaheni ya huo nareopeherayou kuhe.

to accompany, go with others. nareohe.

lower eyelid. perimi.

I place the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

At dawn they offered baskets of food, they offered baskets full of momo fruits. the pe ni ithãprayou ha henaponi, momo ke a ithãprai ha kuparuheni.

1. To place a deep container on the ground; to offer food that is inside a deep container. 2. To dig a hole.. ithããi.

the vines (that serve to tie) loosen due to the heat of the sun. hotho pe terekou.

vines. hotho.

he just entered the agouti's den. opo pekapi ha a rukerihe.

I just stole some banana plant shoots (to plant them). k uratha ya siki kararu thomiã re ayarekirihe.

indicates an immediate past (in affirmative statements) or a more distant past within the same day (in questions). ku-he.

to be surrounded, to be crowded. hithokoprou.

to have drunk. weikiarei.

to wait for fruits to soften in order to harvest or eat them. prehepimai.

Follow me, you will capture a small enemy (= Follow me, you will kill an enemy). ware ke wa ihirupi huweape, a nosi ta yauiku.

to capture, to catch, to seize (multiple objects). huwemai.

he wants to wait for the morã fruits to ripen before picking them. morã mape niya ushiamai.

to wait for a fruit to ripen before harvesting it. ushirayou.

I whistled (to call someone). ya husi heãmoma.

he was swinging in his hammock whistling between his teeth. the husi heã kãi wãri yãteyãtemoma.

to whistle (to call someone). heãmoma.

I ask you please to ambush (= to arm your bows) at the front of the path. mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripakirihe she e.

the front part, the part of the path leading away from the dwelling, the head of a group moving in a line. paripakirihe.

separate in several parts. tikaromai.

to separate into several parts. tikaromai.

Bachaco did not return until the afternoon. koyeriwe weyate a shiro kotããma.

to arrive habitually at a certain time or under certain circumstances (always the same). kotããma.

ritual of seclusion and dietary restrictions. shuhuhuru.

The beehive, he dropped the pieces and went down. mpió el nido de abejas, dejó caer los trozos y bajó.

beehive, bees. mpió.

he took a large stone, so wide. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

1. to widen, extend (surface), expand 2. to widen a surface 3. to be locally vast (surface). reraha.

I have acne on my face. ya mi pe shohepi mo.

acne. shohe.

who inclined (the container) of my kashuhuri seeds. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

I waited for the paují bird to land (before shooting an arrow at it). paruri ya romakema.

to incline or place something in a certain position. kashuhuri.

Are you (pl) painted and adorned. wamaki paushimoã haikiprariyo ta kuhawe.

to be painted and adorned. haikiprariyo.

while they were holding Hokotoyoma, they were scraping his skin. hokotoyoma a huwepipou tehe, a hoãpii re kukeiwei (mit.

1. To hold, immobilize (with the hand). 2. To possess hekura inside the chest (shaman).. huwepou.

the place where the monsyorehi was found. ihiru pei koroku ha ha kema: el lugar donde se encontraba el monsyorehi.

a flat open-weave basket for carrying a child on the back. monsyorehi.

abandoned path. wairemahe.

to be always criticizing or scolding. wã pakehe.

as Amoãyoma wants to go under it, the leaves of the song tree embellish it. ãmoã ke hena, ãmoãyoma ke a pehithou puhio ke yaro, pei ke hena noshi re hariape ye.

embellish. hariape.

to paint dots on someone. tipikiakei.

bend over. pariki tehehewe.

there were knives, but the two children damaged them and now there are no more. kushiyo re pe kuoma ma kui ihiru ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

to damage, to destroy. wãriãpini.

I did not sleep all night. ya mamo he wakararayoma.

to not close one's eyes all night. mamo he wakarai.

to remain in a certain place or situation until dawn; to stay awake all night. wakarai.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered with bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to cause to have a bruise. hãepotopiãmai.

to get a tonsure. hoãmou.

aunque allá el enemigo sea aterrorizante, yo me propongo atacarlo (lit. kihi kitanari a pata re fuopiyei, a no ma kiriai tehe, a nape niya rii keo totihiawe.

puma; Felis concolor (Felidae). kitanari.

to take or give two objects. horokorei.

to put, arrange, or cut to the same measure (perfective, plural object). manikiakei.

the supernatural jaguar killed one after another those who had a beautiful face. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

killed one after another. katitiaprai.

to press with the foot, to hold something with the foot. kateteai.

to cause to be finished. shikopipramai.

to calm down, to desist from going to live elsewhere as announced in a fit of anger. yãnikikei.

strabismus. ashe.

to make love with a woman (often very young) without penetrating her, rubbing the penis against her sex. tiketikemou.

to put one. mishiãki kahu.

heel. mamiki shihona.

heel. shihona.

Siroromi arrived (near the woman) when her husband was hunting and also it can be The word 'kopema' in Yanomami means 'without weapons'. pe heãropi a rãmi huaai tehe, siroromi a kopema.

arrived. kopema.

to fold twice. wapureprai.

but as there were no footprints, they stopped. the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

to have several footprints. yashikitaami.

the chain vine is concave (actually it is sinuous). rasirasi thotho a mi hopokowe.

concave surface or wall. hopokowe.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

Guianan toucanet (bird species). aoaomi.

to crush partially something with the incisors (perfective aspect of the inceptive, singular object). washishikei.

succession of periods during which fishing was alternately good and bad. imãtããi.

to tell someone to bend their head to receive a blow from an adversary. sheamai.

a woman grated cassava, put the pulp to dry, and cooked the cassava bread early in the morning. suwe theni nashi fiki ha hirikikini, fiki ha shirikiparini, fiki rãmãi fenapraoma.

to grate cassava. hirikikini.

it is always he who procures goods for me. kama ke iha matohi ya pe shiro torerai.

obtain habitually goods from a particular person or in a certain community. torerai.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

moss. kapurashi.

to become smooth and moist. frakahai.

sensation of discomfort (of physical or psychological origin). senno.

plural object, tirere- dispersed (sense 1 and 2). tirereprawe.

they make tari, tari, tari. tari, tari, tari. and here they are, arriving one after the other, coming to live in my chest. wa ki kuorani, wa ki peripraai ta kuparuhani.

to arrive one after the other. ripraai.

to have breathed rapidly, to have been panting. hereheremorayou.

to be tied/closed in that manner (referring to a basket with opposite edges tied together). itutuprawe.

to lie down for a moment one against the other. hohãthãtou.

magic substance. kramosi.

grab plantains and eat them (each one on their own). pei ke wama the ãsiki ha toani, the ta waapotuhe.

eat (each one on their own). waapotuhe.

to untie. moshoko-.

ant. Pheidole.

those trees are generally tender. aparepe ma usiwei.

tender, soft. aparepe.

the one who is brave, the jaguar (= the warrior cannibal). hei a pata re nosimop e.

the brave one, the jaguar (= the cannibal warrior). nosimop.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to tell someone to scratch once to another person. hukekeamai.

to give several kicks. kahathorarei.

as the tapir perceives the reflection of the hunters surrounding it, it starts to walk. yãnomãmi the pe manashi he hãyowe ha shama a pata terekekeherayou.

as the tapir perceives the reflection of the hunters surrounding it, it starts to walk. terekekeherayou.

the fish will be pungent. yuri a nakiprariyo.

to become stronger, more pungent, or more acidic (perfective form). nakerayou.

to be wrinkled or crumpled in a place. ãpretou.

to become ill due to the loss of one. noreshipiai.

cuñado, es lo que te digo sinceramente (lit. shori e naha suwehe ke a kuu wawetoowei.

to say sincerely. wawetoowei.

in the center (of the web), where it is dense, the Spider-Spirit was curled up. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

to sleep deeply. fmio sutao.

1. to become dense, thick, thick (in the center of something) 2. to make dense, thick, thick. sutaai.

to be decorated with a circle. oni rohahaa.

to be decorated with a circle. rohahaa.

listen attentively (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. kahiki totou.

listen attentively. yimika ta.

they are dead. pe tokurariyoma.

to be dead. tokurayo.

to close the mouth, to have the mouth closed. sutio.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I thrust the point into it. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to place or be against someone. tisuo.

I spend my time lying in the hammock. ya peritao.

I don't do anything, I spend my time sleeping. ya ohotamou mai, ya mitao tharei.

he stayed stuck for a long time. a hikitao heatima.

he had been crouching for a good while when Honey appeared. a wãri retao tehe yãmonãmãriwe a petariyoma.

to stay for a long time in a position or situation. totihionomi.

there is a wasp nest in the waterfall, we (you and I) will go burn it. pora ke a ha kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

we will burn. hisikayorupe.

he will prepare a basket of tobacco, which you always lack. pee nahe thari thapraiwe, wa ma re horimou tharei.

I don't have any more of that. ya horiprou waik i a.

your wives deny you tobacco and keep you needing it. suwepihe pe shi ha imaoni pee ke wama nahe pe ha horipoheni.

to need something; to be lacking something. thapraiwe.

I place the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

At dawn they offered baskets of food, they offered baskets full of momo fruits. the pe ni ithãprayou ha henaponi, momo ke a ithãprai ha kuparuheni.

1. To place a deep container on the ground; to offer food that is inside a deep container. 2. To dig a hole.. ithããi.

the fire went down the cliff. pei maki pata wake nihorãi ha kuparuni.

to slide down something, to precipitate down a slope, to fall rolling. nihoroprou.

disperse (while walking). pe ta rãikiroheri.

they had abandoned the path each one in a different place (to mislead their pursuer) and, despite that (although they took that precaution), the beast came straight towards them. yãnomãmi the ki pao rãikio ma yaiomopotayowei ha, yaro ke a pata katitou ha kuparuni (mit.

to manifest in several different places. rãikirayou.

her husband was going to be stunned when he arrived. pe heãropi ke e ãmoku keprohorope.

to be stunned/stupefied. keprohorope.

the house of the h e k ura sways from side to side (while being transported). yahi wa hute pata ta ataataaprarou thare.

to oscillate, to sway from side to side. ataatamou.

The anteater lay on its back to sleep. hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

1. To lie on one. rekekeai.

he/she is my younger brother/sister. aiye ke a.

his/her younger brother/sister. pe ai.

my younger brother engendered him. aiyeni ke a tararema.

younger sibling. aiyeni.

there where Titiri was perched, he possessed the darkness. titiri a re roowei ha, titititi a thapoma (mit.

the night, the darkness. titititi.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

he arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to follow, to walk behind. nohão.

when it started to rain, she went to collect leaves under which she took shelter. maa a kei tehe, yãã ke the henaki ha thakini, a he yohokema.

to take shelter, to take refuge. yohokema.

to make several knots on the same object. moshokorekei.

to be inferior to, to be shorter than. hawewe.

the váquiros forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

to accompany someone by following them. yaumai.

to be hungry. rohehewã.

the small stream becomes increasingly narrow. poko u he horokoai.

to narrow, to close off, not allowing passage (a stream, a path). horokou.

wã piyekai: 1. wã piyekai: 1. To repeat the same information in different places. Repetir la misma información en distintos lugares.

2. 2. To jump from one topic to another in a disorderly and confusing manner. Pasar de un tema a otro de manera desordenada y confusa.

to repeat the same information in different places; to jump from one topic to another in a disorderly and confusing manner. wã piyeke.

carry me on your back, I am gravely injured. yare ta yehireheriyo ya wãri waikou totihio ke a kuhe.

carry me on your back. yehireheriyo.

Who are you, that you have a breath that smells of female sex. weti wa mishiãki ni moshiri reprou ayarayou ta kuhawe (cha. (= who are you, who, pretending to be a shaman, nevertheless make love with women) (the shaman detected that smell while in a trance). ).

to have the smell of someone who has just made love, to smell of female sex. moshiri.

the house of the hekura sways from side to side (while being transported). yahi wa hute pata ta ataataaprarou thare.

to oscillate, to sway from side to side. ataprou.

there where the ãpuri tree rises, there where a koshiro beehive is found, I will go to collect honey (lit. ei ãpuri hi re uprayahi, ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni, ya naki ta ruwemoma.

to destroy a beehive to harvest honey (lit.: deprive of warmth). ãpuri.

Zool. Zool. , lizard (unidentified (animal, plant)). , lagartija (no identificado (animal, planta). Lives in underground holes. ).

lizard (unidentified). reama akatho.

The ant bites me. Kokoku ẽ koko.

good word. orawe koko.

termite. koko.

to clean or paint multiple objects white. aumararei.

suwepihe: second person singular, your wife. suwepihe: segunda persona del singular, tu esposa.

your wife. suwepihe.

to become smooth and moist. frakahaprou.

the woman had no children, however he left leaving her alone. suwe shiroko ke a ma kui, a ha takiherin i.

my daughter, could it be that he has abandoned us. shete, yamare wãri ta takeherii kuhawe.

to abandon, to leave someone or something alone in a place. takiherin.

the old woman sang the song of anger. suwe patani the ã wãyoã thapema.

anger, wrath. wãyoã.

to clear the ground, clean it, leave it clean in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. takakapei.

to slide, slip, tumble down a slope (plural subject). fkahehe.

to shorten a bamboo arrowhead. pookosikei.

the burning heat of the house has spread beyond (its limits). yahi a heyoshi he re toreparuhe ye.

to go beyond, to surpass limits. torepa.

they are not many. pe peheriami.

they are not many. peheriami.

it is hard. the hihuwe.

to be hard. hihuwe.

vine, liana (unidentified plant or animal). uhãwe.

Why are they inviting me. ware nakapou ma ta sihewe.

dubitative modality. ta sihewe.

Titiri flapped his wings to (make his parasites fall off). titiri pei ke nomapi re yahuhuprouwei.

to flap wings in one place, to flap wings without flying (a bird). yayuhou.

to dent or crease an object in one place. wãikikei.

they were abducting his sister and he remained indifferent, in his hammock. pe yai pe shaimaihe tehe a mohoti peritaoma.

we abducted a woman from their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to drag, to abduct a woman by force. shaimai.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

sweet, sugary. kreteti.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

to scratch someone with an arrow, to cause a superficial wound. yaheai.

the spider monkeys move along the trees. hii pe hami pasho pe imii.

come back to me for a moment, keeping your balance. ata imiprao kooima.

to walk balancing, to move along the trees, along the branches. imitaai.

to deepen the interior of an object, to make a cavity deeper. koehãmai.

the Yawari possess hollow tubes, similar to a blowgun, with which they blow magical substances (in their home located under the water). yawari ke peni rihu pe u nohi thapou kuporahei.

they blow (magical substances) there. kuporahei.

to be inferior (plural object). hawehea.

to cut a piece of game meat for oneself. pakekerei.

to shave someone. mãroskoshi.

I am really worried about those two. ya kipi nohi haruhupou totihio.

to come to feel concern for someone, to fear for someone. rai.

over there, on the other side of the river, another big mountain rises. kiha ai ke a pata hehu upraa re pekatuawei.

mountain, hill, elevation. hehu.

to hold in place with the foot. kateterei.

fohi himou: to manifest that one is hungry. fohi himou: manifestar que se tiene hambre.

to proclaim. himou.

to start peeling with circular motions (as an apple is peeled with a knife). shokekeprai.

to surface. kapokoo.

the old man jumped suddenly and transformed into a termite nest hanging upside down from a sisimi tree. pata a yeteprakema, sisimi hi ha orawe koko.

he jumped suddenly. yeteprakema.

Siroromi arrived there. siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

a mythological figure. Siroromi.

(yo le digo) a mi cuñado: "vete con tu perro a matar chácharos" (lit. heriye ke a hore re kui ha.

brother-in-law. shori*.

to produce foam. moshiamai.

my older brother has killed a red-faced wood-quail (with his arrow). ãiweni hoya ke a wai tharei kuroi.

red-faced wood-quail. fwamou.

I throw it outside. sipo hami ya the sheyei.

to throw, to launch. sheyei.

to shake (a wet animal, a dog). yomisiprai.

to beautify, make beautiful (by feeding well). riyehekei.

to prepare a large quantity of food, to give in large quantities. prekei.

then you have to place several logs on top of each other. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

to lie on top of each other, to be sick and lie on one object then another. fmakeke.

it is dangerous (it is a good weapon, a good magic plant). the nini: es peligroso (es una buena arma, una buena planta mágica).

to be dangerous. efecyeha.

the hekura started to smile. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

the smile froze on his lips. fa kasi watetou retou ayaroma o a kasi watetou yakea ayakema.

to smile. watea.

(synonym of yaporeai). yaproko.

no permitió a su suegra dormir. pe yesi a miã shi hihirimapoma.

no llegó a quedarse verdaderamente dormido. a mio shi hihirio yaioma.

did not allow to sleep. hihirimorãyou.

he covered his mouth with white down, and also his chest. pe kahiki horoimama, pe pariki kãi horoimama (mit.

to cover something or someone with white down. horoimama.

to keep someone awake, not let them sleep. hihirimomai.

to experience again. ãmoku yoothoprou.

to experience again. yoothoprou.

who has inclined the palm spade where my kashuhuri seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yotehekei.

to bite (once or several times, said of snakes). warikirarei.

aplaskataoto is a tree (unidentified (animal, plant)). aplaskataoto hi Bot.

tree (unidentified). aplaskataoto.

Brother-in-law, I would have come to visit you, but the gossip made me turn back. shori, pe he mori warou re, wãnowãno re ki ha ya humapi rea re kure.

gossip, rumor. wãnowãno.

the celestial hekura that wear the smoke of the rainbow around their necks. hetu ke misi pe pata wake shi omãyãri re harehei (cha.

The arrendajo grabbed her by the twisted cotton thread that she wore around her chest. ãyãkorãriweni shinari re iki re hareponowei ha a huwerema (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to wear around the neck or chest. harekei.

cutting the forest in long strokes, applying blows. hikari theka hami kuratha a perikiwe.

cutting, chopping (object in long strokes, applying blows). perikiwe.

to back up abruptly (to avoid something dangerous, for example a snake). tiruruprou.

flower bud, type of flower, flowers of certain trees such as epena hi, momo hi, wapu kohi, etc.. hunaki.

to draw a line. shetitiai.

to begin to push away, reject with the hands (repeatedly). hiruruprai.

(habla de río arriba. mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. feri.

we will go hunting paujies at night illuminating ourselves with torches. no yaipi nape yãikoheripe: iremos a cazar paujíes durante la noche iluminándonos con tizones.

to illuminate (something or someone, with a torch or making the fire flare up). pe yãikiãi: iluminar (algo o a alguien, con una antorcha o haciendo que el fuego llamee).

to illuminate. yãiki.

dejar entibiar. pothothamai.

your husband passed by this way a moment ago. heyemi heãrohe re pe ayou kuroi.

it is said that the flood waters are coming this way towards us. heyemi motu ke u ora hoã kuaai kurai (mit.

this way, towards the speaker. heyemi.

to walk on the heels. mamiki kayetimou.

to walk on the heels. kayetimou.

¿por qué sientes resentimiento hacia mi suegra. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

why?. yaahe?.

to shorten a strap. yekehi.

they went hunting (this morning). pe rãmi ayou ke a kuroi.

to go. ayou.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokomari.

(he) has really the intention of making it end. a mi niya wathemai ha totihioni.

to have the real intention of making something end, to have the real intention of killing something. wathemai.

to be lying down without sleeping; to fail to fall asleep. shimaka.

he does not grow fast. a preprao haiomi.

to have a strong desire to sleep. fmaharishi preprou.

to feel the effects of a substance strongly. fwayu preai.

to grow, to develop; to increase, to intensify; to enlarge, to widen (a cavity). preprao.

1. inguinal lymph node. 2. to have a swollen inguinal lymph node.. moshi.

to have diminished, to have become small. wãisipirayou.

to roll up a rope or thread letting it fall slowly while exerting a circular motion on it. yoririamai.

to pile up, to stack. yutumai.

to acquire a hollowed out circular mark (on a cylindrical or spherical object). esheheãi.

winding river. orarahari ha, kihi u re shokerahari ha.

winding, meandering. shokerahari.

my dog is a good hunter. thariye a suhirina.

good hunter. thariye.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to separate, divide (multiple objects) with duration. kakai.

to tear, rip, break, separate, split, tear incompletely; tear at the edge (with the hand). kakaa.

to build several temporary shelters or several camps (at different times) in the same place. fyãno yarikamai.

to hit someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikayou.

to smell of urine. natheri.

to paint round spots on the body by rolling a ball of onoto (red dye) mixed with saliva on the skin. hikikiãi.

to recover, to get better (health state). wahuprou.

psychotropic substance. yakoãna.

to begin to paint round spots on someone or something by applying a ball of coloring moistened with saliva. hikikiprai.

there close by, inside the same house, they wrapped their feces in leaves and threw them (over the roof). yahi hami, ahete hami, shii pe ha hãromaheni, the pe hãro sheyemahe.

to wrap, to package (usually in leaves). hãromai.

to be hungry. ãyãhã.

you are the one who has forced them to walk quickly, it is because of you that they are walking so fast. kaheni ke wa pe wãri hore ha hushushuponi, wa pe kãi wãri hore ropaai ma re kui.

to force to walk quickly. hushushu.

piasaba palm, chiquiqui palm; Leopoldinia piassaba (Arecaceae). raharaea.

the tobacco seeds will germinate later. waiha, nahe mo homorariyo.

the calf split open to give birth to a child. eyeha ke matha ha homopraruni, ihiru a kuprariyoma (mit.

to germinate, to sprout, to open (flowers, eyes, etc.). homorariyo.

we carry cooked plantains on our backs. kuratha yama pe ripi re yehihiponowei.

cooked plantains. yehihiponowei.

mode of locomotion of reptiles. ethethou.

to become non-linear, to bend, to curve, to become winding (often referring to an arrow). ethethe.

as it became night (and they could not see anything), they scattered their belongings. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikamahe.

night, darkness. titioni.

to give little shouts (referring to). keekeemo.

wood split in that way. yahathoma.

they insist on repeating that, that's what I'm saying. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

they insist on repeating it. yatiatihe.

the female váquiro ancestors were moving in the center (of the herd). wareriyoma mi ãmo hami pe huma.

designates a female mythical ancestor or hekura. -yoma.

I am carving a bamboo tip. rahaka ya kopemai.

we will prepare bamboo tips like these (to go to war). e naha rafaka ke pe kuwe pema pe ha kopemani.

to prepare, smooth, carve, divide into pieces. kopemai.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk. warorou.

you will cook them several times in water, and you will eat them hot. wa the pe ha hariaprani, yopri ke wa the pe wape.

you will cook them several times in water. hariaprani.

we do not stop killing chiggers (there are so many). hihu na pe shemou no tetemi.

kill. shemou.

we want to carry in our hands the rock that serves as our dwelling. ye (cha.

to carry something from one slope to another (of a mountain, of a hill). kiriope.

wait, we will walk during the night. waiha, titi ha pemaki kuaaheripe.

we will walk. kuaaheripe.

to remove lice by combing through hair. noma pe yakekeai.

pei. konatho.

to penetrate a woman (jokingly). fmoroshi epehetou.

to penetrate a woman (jokingly). epehetou.

the child was crying. ihiru a miã ikima.

Nosiriwe was sobbing for lack of tobacco. nosiriwe ke a peshiri miã ikima (mit.

to cry for a dead person. ikima.

something similar to the phosphorescence of fireflies has just come off. hawe amakuri ke ki wake re hetirihe (cha.

to come off, to detach, to cease. hetirihe.

generic term applied to macaws. maraka.

to leave (by negligence) wild vegetation to invade the conucos (cultivated plots). shototamai.

Pl. hopehope heto siki.

thorny plant; Cestrum sp. (Solanaceae); thorny palm (unidentified). hopehope.

to have an empty stomach, to be hungry. koehe.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to curve, to bend into an arc shape. payokou.

there is a smell of váquiros. ware ke ki ni waua.

to be present (smell). wau.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. fmatotowe yo.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. fmatotowe.

to make a medium-sized or rather large object (in relation to the usual size of the object in question). proweheakei.

¿dónde los pondremos a cocinar. weti ha ke pema pe hariape.

mujeres, cocinen (en agua) los alimentos (preparen la comida). suwe pewe, nii pe ta hariapotuhe.

pon a hervir plátanos. kuratha ki ta hariri.

to cook in water, to boil in water. hariape.

those who made the cotton balls carried them on their backs, accompanying (the visitors). shinari uko re thaiwehei the pe ha yehiarariheni pe nokaope.

to carry (something) on one. thaiwehei.

they have blown horeprema at us, they have directed it towards us. kiha horeprema ke pehiki wãri horashikei ma re kurohei, hei horeprema hiki ma re yarepiyekiri.

magic plant cultivated, guate; Maranta arundinacea (Marantaceae). The women pulverize it, deposit the powder in the palm of their hands and blow it against the adversaries of their community in the course of a combat, to provoke their flight. The powder can also be spread over the footprints of enemy warriors, to weaken them and cause them leg pain; delayed in this way, the enemies can be reached and attacked.. kurohei.

I will only take a dose of the hallucinogen. epena ya ayarei.

I have discovered them before others. ya the ki ayarema.

to take a fraction of something for oneself; to discover before others; to notice immediately. ayarei.

no deshagas el collar para regalar las mostacillas puesto que no has respondido favorablemente al pedido de mi cuñado (= si no le das a uno, no le des al otro). tope ke ki wetitihe shoriwe ke wa wã huai ma re maohe.

acceder a un pedido, aceptar hacer el amor (mujer). wetitihe.

sinuous stream that forms many meanders. u shokekewe.

to be sinuous, to have numerous meanders. shokekewe.

thanks to the light of the moon, it is clear. peripo shni the hiwatuwe.

light of the moon. shni.

When Jaguar's arms were too short to embrace the tree trunk, he went mad. irariwe ke a pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma.

to have arms too short to fully embrace an object. surirou.

again the woman described a curve. suwe e naha ke a tihiyea kuprou ha koroni.

curve. kuprou.

Are all the bamboo tips well painted. ekipini rahaka ãiãmo ke ki tahititiraruhawe.

all. ekipini.

the ancestors did not take into account (lit. e ki wãri kuu mai, pe yaweremou no motaai.

brothers and sisters. pe yaweremou.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

the demon of the night was perched on a branch that curved towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma.

to bend, curve, arch. hithoreai.

to make dry; to protect from rain. wehetimarei.

perfective causative of . hotemarei.

the woman that one and the other married was splendid (polyandric alliance). suwe ke a noshi hari tepiama.

he is ugly (antiphrase). a noshi harirawe.

splendid, magnificent. harirao.

to tap on a termite nest with the hand in order to make the termites fall on someone's head and bite them, for fun. he yoothomapei.

to tap on a termite nest with the hand in order to make the termites fall on someone. yoothomapei.

they split up after a dispute over a woman. suwe ke a nowã hã the pe shekeroma.

the reason for which, the cause of. shekeroma.

esos dos son los únicos que comen orugas cocidas. kama ke kipini kasha ripi pe wapii ayao (mit.

orugas cocidas. wapii.

I was quickly dipping it into the honey to eat it. wãisipi ya the wai ha otoototaakini.

to quickly dip food into a liquid to eat it. otoototaakini.

he lay in his hammock adorned with a transverse line. thoo ke thoku tipruta ha a perikema.

to be lying quietly in one. peritaa.

tell someone to go. komãrei.

now that things are barely perceptible (in the dark), we will get lost, we say. pei inaha the wai waroshoo tehe pemaki yakeriheri, yamaki ha kuni.

to be barely perceptible in the dark. yakeriheri.

despite being very far away, get me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

distant, far away. yakepa.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin (perfective, plural subject). turekerariyo.

to do it with several fruits (durative). wãthemimai.

to catch the end of a fruit with the incisors and exert pressure to remove the seed from the shell. ãthemimai.

I divide the tobacco leaf into two (by tearing it along the central vein). pee ya nahe ayakosiprai.

to divide into two equal parts. ayakosiprai.

he climbed back up and initiated the last part of his ascent. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

initiated the last part (of an ascent or journey). poushukurayou.

look at me. a mi ta yaitaru.

to turn one. thatou.

to stop feeling friendship for someone. puhi shomi.

the rock wall of the mountain is very high and there is a piapoco perched on it. pei ke maki tirewe totihiwe hami, iha mayepi ke a kãi re rorakiri (cha.

Intensifier used in the . pashi.

to bristle (feathers or hair). mãririãi.

in the moment when one suffers an attack. wã hutherei.

to suffer an attack. hutherei.

my eyes became red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

my eyes became red. wakepema.

here they are (those we were just talking about), they are precisely those. ih i p e.

here they are. ihi p e.

(he) tied the legs of the tapir in pairs (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie the legs of an animal in pairs to carry it on the back. warekema.

he stopped, thirsty, every time he passed near a hole with dark and foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

stagnant water contained in holes and depressions. roaamai.

piece of wood that is naturally pointed. yakekewe.

to align, to press together. shani-.

to smell bad, to stink, to reek. ni wãriãi.

to smell bad, to stink, to reek. wãriãi.

to begin to feel fear. kiriprou.

to shell corn. yoagua.

to be very hungry. shetashetamo.

it is over there, not very far, that the path leads into another. ihami ke a no mãyo he hapraa kure.

to lead into at a certain distance (not very far). he hapraa.

when it thunders hard, one gets startled. ikãri yãru a wã hai tehe the pe kiriapramai.

it was he who treated them as cowards. ihini re pe pe kiri himai kuper e i.

to startle, to treat someone as a coward, to shame. kiriaprai.

drink. a ta koari.

drink. koari.

to separate the buttocks. horihikei.

he stumbled. a yuturayoma.

Squirrel was moving by jumping (mit. karioriwe ke a wãri yutuaprarou re kuaaiwei.

to be projected (with some degree of force or violence), to jump from branch to branch (a bird, a monkey, etc.). yuturayou.

with spines. mohomi.

(he/she/it) speaks upstream. peipei shiﬁ.

upstream (river). peipei.

your son-in-law. siyohahe.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepiai.

to take several parts. hakaroararei.

that brave man. hei a pata re nosiyemope.

that brave man. nosiyemope.

all the trees that I cut to collect the honey of the bees oi, get caught, one after the other. okai ma kure, pe he pehi hããtarou tikoo thai.

a fish bone is getting stuck in my throat. yuri ya niosi hããi.

to get caught, to get stuck, to be intercepted. hããi.

to a certain point. wãhasta.

I was present when they went away from the dwelling one after the other. ya no kuo tehe the pe hokeokema.

they went away from the dwelling one after the other. hokeokema.

he set out at daybreak to go hunting. a henaprou ha koroherini, pei yo.

to set out at daybreak. henaprou.

to calumniate or denounce someone, to tell a story (after having been reluctant). wayoprai.

the two women got up from their hammocks and went away. suwe ke kipi re hoketariyoheriiwei.

they got up and went away. hoketariyoheriiwei.

I put a lid on the pot. hapoka ya si ka he kahuai.

He took off the big stone he had around his neck, and covered the hole with it. maa ke ma pata opi hayuu ha kuparuni, a ka he kahua shoakema.

While walking, he forcefully applied his hand to the noses of the two women to make them inhale an aphrodisiac. suwe ke kipi hiyoka kahupraroma.

I close the door. ya yoka kahuai.

to obstruct, to cover, to close. kahuai.

he refused to give the knife. sipara si a noshi imãpoma.

he/she refused to give it. imãpoma.

to be angry. oyokorema.

it's raining. maa ke a ahetoimai.

it. ahetoimai.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoiku.

to embrace, to hug. poroa.

to do something in a hurry. rere.

to stand on a guatura (child, to be carried that way). tikepei.

to have stomach cramps. yoote.

it is certain that there is no muddy ground. h e ãhãtu prare ke the.

those are muddy grounds, do not approach them. heãrohe a ma re nos movedizos, no se acerquen.

hurry to hang your hammock under your husband's. heãrohe ke iha a ta pepia ta haiiku: apresúrate a colgar tu chinchorro debajo del de tu esposo.

muddy ground in which one sinks. terre1.

to make an object thicker in all its dimensions. supramararei.

to cause cramps. krimomai.

they (the hekura) set fire to my legs. ware mathaki wake re piyeamape ye e.

legs. piyeamape.

Titiri flapped his wings to (make his parasites fall off). titiri pei ke nomapi re yahuhuprouwei.

to flap wings in one place, to flap wings without flying (a bird). yayuhou.

they descended to the river to shoot their arrows at the fish. parawa u ha yuri pe niyai mi re ithopariyowei.

to descend, to get off (a canoe). ithopariyo.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another people or women from one. pashikitou.

to become smooth and moist. frakahai.

to make a little fat. preãkããmai.

to make something locally thicker or denser. suprakei.

the ancestors decided to fight hitting each other and sang a hunting ritual song. poreri ke the pe tuyeyou puhio yaro, the pe herii ha kuponi.

they fought hitting each other. tuyeyorayou.

to bend or fold objects by inclining or folding them (southern Orinoco dialect). ututu.

to modify the meaning of another verb; verb modal. kumodiﬁca.

he approached quickly and obstructed the orifice of the cavity where that one was. mieka he kahukema (mit.

to approach quickly. mieka.

Jaguar let go and fell down. irariwe ke a wãri huheprou ha kuparuhuruni.

to fall down. kuparuhuruni.

Jaguar put himself slowly in a crouching position (and said): "I will never find my way back". irariwe ke a ha roaruni: "ya no katitipropi mai ke".

to put slowly in a crouching position. roaruni.

mientras él estaba colgado cabeza abajo de un algarrobo aislado, Osa hormiguera daba vueltas alrededor de la plaza central de la casa. ãro yawerewe kohi ha a mi wereo tehe, teperiyoma a rii tiwaroa shoarayoama.

Osa hormiguera daba vueltas alrededor de la plaza central de la casa. shoarayoama.

when there is nothing to eat one does not have much will to work (lit. e naha re sipe oheprou kuo totihio, the pe ohotamapou ma re mai.

to have the will to work. ohotamapou.

[he/she/it] became impatient. shi harirakei.

to be impatient. shi harirawe: estar impaciente.

to become impatient. shi harira.

the dog was small, not big. wãisipi a wai hiima kuoma, prewe mai.

to diminish, to become smaller, to narrow. wãisipiai.

older brother, here is an excellent palm heart. yei ke ãmo wai wãnipraa kure: hermano mayor, he aquí un excelente palmito.

palm heart. ãmo.

to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (durative, plural object). pookosimai.

to float. karoroai.

without a doubt it slipped under the roof. a huure ke the.

to slide or slip under the roof. huure.

he carried the arrows, arms bent at head height. shereka ki yeretai yairayoherima.

he carried the arrows, arms bent at head height. yairayoherima.

the otter escaped immediately. proro ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to escape, to flee. ia.

to make someone release what they are holding, to make a thief drop their loot when caught in the act. huhemarei.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei (mit.

1. To climb a tree by clinging to the trunk with both arms. 2. To surround, encircle; to acquire a circular mark.. haruku.

term of kinship. vocati-.

speech from upriver. kufrãima sina.

speech from upriver. kufrãima.

to disappear in the vegetation. theaai.

the region where I have lived in other times. fipa hiki.

in another region and also it can be The word 'hiki' in Yanomami means 'to grate'. fshomi ke the hiki ha.

region. hiki.

I will give you everything (willingly). ya pe hipeai hititiope.

I will give (willingly). hititiope.

the hallucinogen seems strong, his face became serious. epena a no wayuopi a mimou puhi tikrohowe.

to put on a serious or angry face. wayuopi.

although I don't have matches, I don't intend to work to get them (lit. ya ma horimou tehe, "pohoroye ya hiki no ohote ta thaa sho", ya kuu mai.

to have the desire to work, to be busy working. ohota.

to have fruits knocked down for oneself with a pole, to receive fruits that have been knocked down with a pole. rekepei.

to receive something divided in that way. wakokopei.

to grow (a child), to heal. hatuke.

I tore it (by hitting it, striking it). hihu ya u na tihekikema.

to hit, strike, collide. tihekii.

to stand on tiptoe for a moment. hiteshetou.

to snort (once). rekukãi.

to be completely deformed, twisted. wãpreterayou.

to become completely disheveled or unkempt. totalporukuprou.

Where do you live. weti ha wa yãã.

The shaman's hammock was hung there. riyehewe tohoopi thoku yãoma.

to have a hammock hung in a place, to live (in a place). yãã.

he wanted to see if it had seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open a fruit longitudinally. eririprarema.

unfortunately, when the others returned one after the other bringing game, Iewe confiscated it. ai peni yaro pe koprouhe tehe ieweni pe toai remou tikoma (mit.

to return bringing something. koprou.

extensive region. aka praukuwe.

the house of the men was wide. yãnomãmi the pe hãtopi nahi praukuoma.

vast, extensive, wide. praukuwe.

to turn over an eyelid. mamo kasi yoreai.

to turn over (an eyelid by playing). yorekei.

in an instant we painted our faces black and over that background, we traced sinuous lines with our fingernails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to have had lines traced on one. tikekemokei.

the ancestors who lived in other times (in different places) transformed (into animals). perihonowei the peni pe shi wãrihoma (mit.

the ancestors who lived in other times (in different places). perihonowei.

the mosquito reye gorged itself on blood. reye a pata makarayoma.

mosquito. reye.

to gnaw, chew slowly (the tip of a long and resistant object to break it). weyata.

to finally speak calmly. okerayou.

it claws him and immediately gets him. a imisiki warihimou shoao tehe, yuprou ma tharei.

to grab with claws or nails. warihimou.

he called his wife urgently. uslos.

he called his wife urgently. uslos.

to break several pieces in that way (durative, plural object). wahathomai.

the path, the way. gilan el camino.

the path, the way. gilan.

with what will I cut it in two?. hãniprape?.

stream of water that becomes turbid or muddy when a living being crosses it. ushishiãi.

to be crushed. nahihi.

voy a tocarte la nariz con el glande. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

1. to touch once with the glans, 2. the state of having been touched with the glans (considered repugnant for a Yanomami). tiprushi.

vaina de la palma. hãkãmi.

to give shelter to someone; to keep an object close to oneself in one. perimapou.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (talking about the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

to relax, loosen, undo. hifo.

those who had gone to kill fish with their arrows in the river, returned to firm ground and gathered with us. yuri pe re niyai mi wereiwehei, pe hashirikei, pe warokei.

to be on firm ground (after having been in the water). wereiwehei.

the irokiri nope are all the time lying in their tiny vine hammocks. pei ke pe thoopi wai yai re kui irokiri ke nope ha wa pe shiro ta perihi thare (cha.

small. nope.

to close the hands. fimiki puushitou.

to close the hands. puushitou.

we intend to go towards you dancing (in the indicated way). yamaki niya tirurou re heaimi ye (cha.

to walk backwards, to dance taking steps backwards and forwards. tirurou.

to want to speak (the southern Orinoco dialect). peshi piri.

to want to do. piri.

colorful crest of certain birds. huko shopapi.

colorful crest (of certain birds). shopapi.

a magical substance prepared from dried and powdered moth, causing symptoms resembling advanced onchocerciasis (river blindness). kamosi.

1. Put, place behind. 2. Mount a child on the back to transport them. ãyoriãmai.

in the place where her (bleeding) fragments were scattered on the ground, the guacamayas wallowed (to paint themselves). a hihiwe yapikope ha arari pe tihirumoma (mit.

to crawl on the ground, wallow (in mud, blood, etc.). tihurumou.

to be angry. hãrohã.

you have seen the mistress of the bamboo tips (that is why you are brave). yawanayoma wa tararema kutaeni.

female spirit associated with bamboo tips. yawanayoma.

did something to take the contents for oneself. oshokorerei.

he buried his nails in the top of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

Hoo had eaten the brains entirely. hooni pe the heyoshipe mi wathea haikiprarema.

top of the skull. heyoshipe.

to tear or cut lengthwise, to tear or cut a strip from the edge of an object. sherirai.

to do everything until the end. ya niaata el ﬁnal, realizarlo todo.

to always want. haimou.

he grabbed the chácharo (a type of animal) from one side and the venado matacán (another animal) from the other side. pei roroku hami poshe a ha yeteikuni, ai a roroku hami preãri a yetemakema.

to grab or seize something from one side and the other. yeteikuni.

tonsure. he roshi.

tonsure. roshi.

to acquire an oblong shape; to elongate a little. toroheprou.

he did not offer me anything. yare tarema.

to offer nothing to someone. re2.

variety (of banana). -rorei.

to have had crosses painted on one. yãhirimorãyou.

it is all stained with dirt, the fire has stained it. the pe pata tepepishi, wa the auprarini.

it is all stained with dirt. auprarini.

there is a bee's nest (hanging), we (you and I) will go burn it. kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

to build a hanging nest (birds, insects). yaumou.

"Father-in-law. shoape. Father-in-law. shoape. " he shouted. e komima.

they shouted for someone to come get them (lit. "yamare ta koreyo. "Come get us. ", pe komima.

to shout several times at different intervals. komitaai.

he went quickly to hide behind the trees and immediately called the human beings. pei ke yo ha yetu ke the pata ha wariripraikiyoni, yãnomãmi the nakai shoaoma.

to go to a place. waroikiyoni.

spider monkey banana (variety). kuratha pasho.

spider monkey. pasho.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

you will make me fall into the water. ya kepariyoma.

to fall into water. kepariyo.

to do something next/later. sherekani yu.

then, next, later, finally. yu-.

immediately the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the surface of the water. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma (mit.

to swim, to float, to flow, to let oneself go. kare.

he/she made something bend repeatedly. mi thorukamai.

to make something bend repeatedly. thorukamai.

1. To separate, by pulling with the hand, the breast of a bird. 2. To peel green plantains or bananas with the hand.. krerokreromou.

some have already planted in the ground the posts that support the base of the roof. ai peni nahi pe hehã theiprawe waikiwe.

to have been planted in the ground. theiprawe.

to be crowded (perfective). hithokokei.

to sneeze. erekerayou.

palms (plural of shitipa). shitipa siki.

the small bamboo point is really very sharp. rahaka ke a wai hitotowe totihiwe.

to have sharpened (bamboo). hitotorei.

your husband passed by this way a moment ago. heyemi heãrohe re pe ayou kuroi.

it is said that the flood waters are coming this way towards us. heyemi motu ke u ora hoã kuaai kurai (mit.

this way, towards the speaker. heyemi.

she really did not manage to fall asleep. a mio shihihirio yaioma.

not manage to fall asleep, spend a bad night (often due to a worry or bad premonition). shihihirio.

on the ground. fmashitha hami.

place where a dead person was burned (lit: cooked earth). fmashitha ripi.

earth, ground, soil. fmashitha.

to keep the head down for a moment. teiprao.

to turn yellow (plant). frããrãi.

breeze, moderate wind; fresh breeze that precedes dawn. huriri.

to introduce the finger. shereka naka tipetai.

to introduce. tipetai.

to split longitudinally, to crack lengthwise (an object). ikrãkãprou.

to descend from a tree by sliding down the trunk quickly. otheherii.

when it started to rain, she went to collect leaves under which she took shelter. maa a kei tehe, yãã ke the henaki ha thakini, a he yohokema.

to take shelter, to be sheltered under something. yohoo.

both are short in stature. kama ke kipi hotakawe.

are short in stature. hotakawe.

to wait for daybreak (to do something). uhehãmai.

the cotton hammock was raised (so that no one would settle in). yii ke ki mi werea.

to hang in the void, to be directed towards the ground. werere.

expresses the speaker. RVpi.

caminamos río abajo y ellos comenzaron a reconocer (el lugar). yamaki mi ha wereikuni, the no wãisipi ihipirema.

to recognize. ihipirema.

(myth): Is it not for lack of tobacco that I lament. peshi perke pe wayu ha ya wã wãri pewe.

campsite or shelter near people already settled. perke.

he transported his two children in the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemarema.

to transport something placed on top of something else; to transport a child seated on a load; to transport in a canoe. tikemarei.

1. New leaf, bud still rolled up 2. Small cotton ball, cotton ball that has shrunk from use. ãkro.

as Mount Maiyo was gradually submerging under water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma (mit.

to submerge food in water, to cover food completely with water while cooking. he shototopei.

to submerge gradually, to let vegetation invade fields, to submerge food in water. shototo.

to roll up a rope. tishoshorei.

movement regularly ascending of someone who is swinging. nonohononohomou.

the scarlet-billed puffbird with the red beak. yorekitirami husi re wakewei.

beak, bill (of a bird). yorekitirami.

to launch magical substances at someone by projecting them with a flick of the wrist. yokeprou.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or peach palms so that they ripen). yaroromakei.

to have a crisis. hurapiai.

to stand with one foot slightly ahead of the other, and the hand on. kaihi.

what am I going to say since I am participating in the ceremonial dialogue. weti naha a niya ha kuni a horomou thawe.

to be whistling in the manner indicated; to speak to someone in the course of a ceremonial dialogue. horomou.

to tear to pieces, to shred. rehihikei.

that causes nausea. the pariki shi harihamai.

to cause numbness or nausea (perfective form). harihimarei.

to wrinkle the forehead. huko siki riikiai.

to wrinkle the forehead. riikiai.

to have hair on each side of the forehead, or pushed back. miki prukakao.

to have hair on each side of the forehead, or pushed back. prukakao.

to fabricate something short on purpose. onohoprai.

to bend, to curve. pehu.

they had already built the shelters (in the forest). the pe hãto nahimoã waikirayoma.

to build a temporary shelter or collective dwelling. fãto.

to be wrinkled or crumpled in a place. ãpretãi.

to crackle. shãiãmo.

to let fruits reach an excessively ripe state. poshoropiãmai.

scrotum. aru siki.

I was afraid and startled. ya ha kirinarumi ya ãtiprariyoma.

perfective form of many intransitive verbs; the perfective of the incoative of processes, certain actions (eating, leaving, speaking) or accidents (falling, shouting). prariyo.

lie down in the hammock, the fish that swim in the water, without any objection, cut for me with their teeth (something to grab them) (= give me fishing line). wa mi ha yaithoni, hei ke ki re shurirorati, wamaki ã hai mai ke ki ta wetiki.

to lie down in a hammock (during a ceremonial dialogue). yaithoni.

to reflect, to think. aaya.

to begin to partially fill or empty. hayaroprai.

everyone knows that the tapirs are infested with ticks. shama pe ma re toripiwei.

are infested with ticks. toripiwei.

as the mother (of his daughter-in-law) kept crying, Toucan's father took pity on her. pe nii e miã he weyaa ha mayepirithawe pe hiini e ã nohi ohote thaarema.

to take pity on, to feel compassion for. thaarei.

(turning) the legs of a dead bird. mamisiki yorekai.

to turn the legs of a dead bird so that the claws catch behind the thighs (to carry it on the back). yorekekei.

I took out the fish from the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

I took out the fish from the canoe. hashiriakema.

to have wrinkles on the buttocks. koroku si rukuruwe.

to be wrinkled. rukurou.

they offer me fish one after the other. yuri pe ha ware a topei notiatarouhe.

they offer/give one after the other. notiatarouhe.

Tucán flew towards the broken liana that was still swaying, and clung to it. thotho hematha yãteãpe hami mayepiritha1 we a yei re notioimi, thotho yãteyãtemou shoao tehe a yeteprapariyoma.

to sway, to swing. yãteãi.

noise made by a living being. terei.

The bark of the ayukuma tree peels off easily. ayukuma a si poshowe.

1. To have several blisters. 2. To peel off easily (skin, bark).. oshowe.

(he/she) speaks upriver. reireima kosi.

upriver speech. reireima.

very close together in a line (animals, plants). pakomato.

they have blown horeprema at us, they have directed yarepiyekiri towards us. kiha horeprema ke pehiki wãri horashikei ma re kurohei, hei horeprema hiki ma re yarepiyekiri.

magic plant cultivated, guate; Maranta arundinacea (Marantaceae). Women pulverize it, deposit the powder in the palm of their hands and blow it against the adversaries of their community in the course of a battle, to provoke their flight. The powder can also be spread over the footprints of enemy warriors, to weaken them and cause them leg pain; delayed in this way, the enemies can be reached and attacked.. yarepiyekiri.

to be completely torn or shredded. rehihirayou.

the cat with the spotted snout. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

the spotted-nosed cat. hayapishiwei.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to reflect. piyekeri.

when he returns he will inform me. a koprou tehe yare wã him i ã p e.

inform someone of the location of something in the forest (fruits, honey, etc.). wã himiãi.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to have covered one. horoimopei.

as they were impure (= incestuous) they all climbed (the posts that support the dwelling). pe no kirihiwe ha pe komi re tukeiwei (mit.

to be repugnant, dreadful, horrendous; to be impure, dirty, incestuous. no kirihiwe.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

superficially (by something or someone). yahepramai.

to make a medium-sized or rather large object (in relation to the usual size of the object in question). prowehamai.

to have been harvested by cutting into pieces. pahetima.

stay calm, be quiet, why do you have to keep gathering, first in one place, then in another, to speak ill (of others). mamikai ke pe ta kuo, weti wama the pe wãhã hore thai kãi yototoaprarou.

to gather, to meet, to group together. yototoai.

you, who pretend to be a shaman, listen then, honey seeker. oi porewe, horehore hekuramorewe a wãri yimika ta taiku.

a jealous person. e ke a.

they did not think of ambushing on the plain at nightfall. weyate, heyari ha yamaki ha ta yereiku, the pe kuu mai.

I arrived at nightfall and slept. weyate re ya ha koponi ya mioma.

sunset, dusk, nightfall. heyari.

(the magic substance) took effect quickly and Lizard (unconscious) loosened his hands and began to slide slowly into the void. yetu re a yuai ha kuparuni rehariwe a wereariyo.

to begin to do something slowly or gradually. taariyo.

despite being very far away, get me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

distant, far away. yakepa.

to make known the name of someone or something. fwãhã tapramai.

he wanted to make his name known (and said): "they are nai flowers, nai flowers. pe the pe ãhã wawepramai puﬁo ke yaro: "nai ke pe, nai. ". " (mit.

to make known the name of someone or something. fwãhã.

Have you killed one of my male relatives, have you made him disappear. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

to shake a bamboo arrowhead laterally to remove it from the arrow shaft; to kill a man. hãweteãi.

the meat is tender. yaro a epehewe.

the bow is too flexible. hãto nahi a epehewe.

soft, tender, flexible. mou.

night has fallen. mi ka supraprou.

night has fallen. supraprou.

he pressed down stones (to cover the holes), but the water eroded the earth and made them fall. maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

to press down, to weigh down, to hold down with weight. hikiãprarai.

to place a vine on the ground in order to provoke a confrontation between two sides, in a game that consists of pulling the vine to drag the opponent out of their field. kareretamai.

Tiger snake hunter. Erpiente tigra cazadora.

snake. erpiente.

(related form). uhehe.

but it has been a long time since I ate wapu fruits. yama pe ya ki nohi warei kurei.

a marker of the remote past (more than a day ago) in the epistemic modality; it is obligatorily accompanied by a perfective form. -reherayo-.

I am afraid. peshiomi nouku.

to be afraid. peshiomi.

objects hung tightly together. t hãrokoprawe , pl.

to be hung tightly together. rukeke.

the jaguar had cut the dog's head off. hiima irani ke a he wetiprama.

to cut in two. wetiprai.

to twist. toyekai.

in front. delante.

belongs to the taxonomic system of plants. nathoshi.

whistle by blowing sideways between the teeth and cheek, whistle like that to call someone. kasi ã hai fkasi ã hai.

whistle call. fkasi.

to break repeatedly. huhetiakei.

she weaves baskets. apia ke hi hore.

to weave. hore-.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much. parohooma.

to bathe. mãrã sinahi.

to bathe. sinahi.

to have a foot that resists the penetration of a sharp object. toukuprou.

black-billed monasa bird; Monasa atra (Bucconidae). It has a red beak.. yoreketirami.

to lie down on the ground for a while. praprao.

he grabbed the ball of dye and quickly painted his chest. nara a ha hurihireni, pariki oni hirihirikema.

expression synonymous with the previous one. fhei ki re hirikope (o hei ki re hirikore).

to be painted by rubbing the body with dye. hirikou.

make them make love, their children will be good hunters. pe ta wamomahe, pe pe ihirupi nihitaprope.

to make love. wamomahe.

to have wavy lines traced on one. hukekamou.

(he) climbed the tree using a scaffold, then went to hunt. we oi ke a yotoharimai peshekuai tehe, nãroni a horaprar.

to place a pole between two trees to pass from one to the other; to construct a scaffold in a tree whose trunk is too large to climb. yotoharimou.

because she was pregnant, she could not walk fast. a shipenapi the nowã hã a haipronomi.

because. haipronomi.

to separate into two groups. pashihiprou.

to limp, to hobble. tiherii.

to sleep well. kurara akahi.

to sleep. kurara.

the shamans will take possession of your footprints. okrã peni wa mãyo re yurareiwehei.

"people from upriver came to attack us with deadly substances", they declared. "ora theri ke pe okã huma", pe nowã thahe.

shaman or sorcerer. okrã.

barely red. manashi momihiwe.

clear. fmanashi.

to perforate (synonym). tiwehe.

edible fruit of the kãye hi tree. kãye.

to sharpen a point. hitotoai.

to get cured by a shaman. nohi reamou.

to get cured by a shaman. nohi reamou.

pile up the leaves, each one on their side, we will spread them out again (to hide our tracks). hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope.

he piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

to pile up, to gather (multiple objects). yototamai.

I will make many scratches on you. pe iprushimararei.

I will make many scratches on you. iprushimararei.

to make something bounce or rebound. mãiãmakei.

he made a detour and passed under the roof of the house, near the place where the hammocks are hung. pe pariherii tehe shapori a sipoo ha re nahi pariki hami e ãyoherima.

made a detour and passed under the roof of the house, near the place where the hammocks are hung. pariherii.

a plant of the genus Costus (Costus anachiri and Costus glabratus). pukunama.

to clear. noshi takaka.

it is here where the disease demon has been fastened (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye.

to tie firmly, to fasten tightly. hatete.

to make vegetation move while moving. prayokou.

he hit it with his machete against the rock, and the pieces flew away. maa ma pe ha sipara a ha tihekikini, the nikashi yuturayoma.

I jumped over a puddle, and I fell right on top of a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki pesheku re katikireiwei.

to be projected (with a certain degree of force or violence); to jump, to leap from branch to branch (a bird, a monkey, etc.). tihekikini.

my daughter, bring me my tube so that I can inhale the hallucinogen soon. nakami, purinama usi ta poima, epena ya ta koai haio.

deceased shaman (in a ceremonial speech or a conversation revolving around death); cultivated reed; Olyra cardifolia (Poaceae); flute, tube for inhaling hallucinogens or blowgun for launching malefic substances made from that reed. purinama.

to shed skin (person). ukukuo.

to be softening. fepeh-a-i.

to be in a state or process. -a-i.

they put cotinga skins in each other's ears, and slid parrot tail feathers under their armbands, they looked really beautiful. heimi ke pe ha huupiararini, kurikaya ke teshina pe ha makekeararini, riyehewe totihiwe ke kipi kuoma.

they put on (something) in their ears. huupiararini.

to put oneself to. argo.

he quickly finished making the club. himo the kãi hirikia ropaa re yairarenowei.

to do something quickly. yairarenowei.

you do not have the appearance of being someone who feels fear. fwa the no wai hore kiriihipi ke.

to not have the appearance of being someone who feels fear. kiriihipi.

the two trees are already connected to each other (one can pass from one to the other). a wãri ihirãã waikia kure.

to be united, to be in contact, to allow passage. ihirãã.

they are the only ones who frequently eat tapir. shama the pe iyai ayao heparoai.

to be the only one in a given situation. heparoai.

titi monkey; Callicebus torquatus (Cebidae). yokoyokomi.

the false shamans interrupt all the time their songs. horemou ke the pe ã re haiwei the pe matha re waiatarou (cha.

interrupt. haiwei.

I remove the embryos from the momo fruits. momo ya pe iprushai.

peeled yopo grains; scratches; embryos extracted from cotyledons; touched with the glande (considered repugnant). iprusha.

to start making a circular motion in the water; to start cleaning a container by making a circular motion with the hand in the water, to start washing a cloth by making that motion; to start stirring the water in a circular motion with the foot to make fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yaprokoprai.

to straighten (make straight or rectilinear) [plural objects]; to give something directly to someone, without intermediaries. shaririakei.

to send the hekura to attack. wayurumou.

he is a liar and also a thief. a horemou, a kãi thomi.

they also transformed into spider monkeys. pasho pe kãi kuprariyoma (mit.

he ran crying and arrived at his house. miã kãi rerea ha yairiherini, kama pe yahipi hami a koprariyoma.

Jaguar's son fell asleep immediately, with his mouth open. ira pe ihirupi miã kãi kahiki rerea shoapariyoma (mit.

also, equally, and (coordination), at the same time that; can also be translated as . hunomi.

he would stop, thirsty, whenever he passed by a pool of dark, foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

to stop and drink water from stagnant pools while traveling. hayuyoma.

to become good (quality of an object). wãnihitaprou.

He could not pass due to a tree being across, to tremble naturally, to tremble for a long time (paludismo, senilidad). temcamo no pudo pasar debido un árbol atravesablar naturalmente, temblar mucho tiempo (pado.

to tremble naturally, to tremble for a long time. prisiprisiwe.

many paujíes (birds) flew away, they were not at all wild. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma, mohoti totih i w e.

to make fly, to cause to fly. yepramai.

as the day never ended, they eventually got tired. the mi haru mraimi ha yãkumi the pe motaai totihioma.

as the fish had stopped biting he returned. yurini ãsitha teai ha mrataruni a korãyoma.

to cease, to stop, to end. mraimi.

they tell you to crush them (by striking with something). wa the ãhã patikirarei.

1. to crush, clean or extract by striking with an object; 2. to strike an object with another to crush it, crush by striking with a stick, a stone, the heel of an axe, etc.; to extract fibers in this way (by striking with a stick); to clean a hammock by striking it with a stick; 3. crushed, extracted by striking. patiki.

to be under the effect of. noma.

when it thunders hard, one gets startled. ikãri yãru a wã hai tehe the pe kiriapramai.

to produce fear, to scare; to intimidate, to shame someone. kirimai.

lying. echado.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. anape.

in an instant, the jaguar climbed up the forked branch. kiha hi shekereo totihiope ha, yetu ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni.

to have a forked end, to be bifurcated. shekereo.

you will crouch under him without him noticing. pei ke fumapi hami wa kuprou fãthoowe.

to crouch under something without being noticed. fumapi.

they did not manage to easily lift the large rock. no lograron levantar fácilmente la gran roca.

they managed. lograron.

they buried sticks at the exit of the burrow (to block the hole). hiki ithãkemahe, pei ke pekapi kasi hami.

to plant, to insert vertically in the ground. ithãkema.

last vertebra of a bird, which joins with the ilium. koshãrãhepi.

I finished polishing the bow. hãto ya nahi hoprarema.

I split the papaya in two. shamakoro ya hakaroprarema.

he picked up the stone axe and split Cachicamo in two. poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

accompanies obligatorily a transitive verb; in the presence of derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning. The allomorph of prare is prari. prari.

to coil or curl completely. wapureprou.

to be very noisy, to make a lot of noise. horerehorere.

roof. techo.

la gente de río arriba usa guayucos tan estrechos que los testículos les sobresalen por ambos lados. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

estar ubicado a ambos lados de. akaroprawe.

to readily engage in violence. puhipe tharehe.

to be brave, to readily engage in violence. puhi no sherekanaripi.

brother, here is an excellent palmito. ãi, yei ke ãmo wai wãnipraa kure.

term of kinship, vocative; designates any direct blood relative, older, and male (male or female speakers): older brother, paternal cousin, father or grandfather, father. ãi.

the tembladors gave me several shocks. peni yare tihekirarei kuhe.

to have suffered one or several electric shocks from a temblador (electric eel). junre.

to drool under the effect of a hallucinogen. fkahu upe hai.

to salivate. fkahu upe suhao.

saliva, drool, spit. fkahu.

to keep together various objects. kokãpou.

to tie the foreskin to a cotton thread around the waist. mo ãteteo.

I am sleeping. ya mioherii.

the water level is dropping. u resiaherii.

deadly substances, poisons. heri.

to shorten something. homotopramai.

Murciélago, who lived in ancient times, died. hewethawe ke a hapa re perionowei, a nomãrãyoma (mit.

died. nomãrãyoma.

uncovered cotton. shinari uku hapresha no.

to uncover, reveal, strip off (e.g. bark, cotton fibers). preshe.

to have a foot pain (from a blow or injury). yutukou.

to warm up food. yotamorayou.

to have opened (the end of a long object). sheteterayou.

when (he) cut the liana the tree slackened suddenly. thoo thotho peprai tehe a pehi kãi yokerayoherima.

to slacken or loosen suddenly. yokerayoherima.

to rise (the level). huyukuai.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

food that has been chewed and offered to a child or domesticated bird, object that has been chewed. wãshikiãrei.

Men use dried and grated bulbs of the manaka plant over fire. Hombres utilizan bulbos secados y rallados de manaka sobre el fuego.

magical plant. manaka.

to dull the edge of an instrument. namo tãihiãm ã i.

to dull the edge of an instrument. tãihiãm.

habla del sur del Orinoco. kãrãpã.

to be afraid. kipiyoru.

oscillate, be lively. akeakemou.

in the conuco there are two bunches of plantains (that can be harvested). hikari theka hami porakapi kuratha ke ki yaua.

some fled. porakapi pe tokurayoma.

some, a few. dual.

I will transport a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

to transport a heavy load. prearei.

condition of the pijiguao palms when they produce their clusters on the lower part of the trunk. yakrikiwe.

llegaremos sin dormir en el camino (we will arrive without sleeping on the way). pemaki koprou shoaotayope.

immediately, quickly, at the same time. shoaotayope.

softened, loosened. wihihiwe.

to pass over the fire (durative). shãishãimai.

enemy. hoheri.

a curved line that joins one corner of the lips to the other, passing through the cheeks and forehead; to have such a line painted on the face. hiporoshikei.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted. oni frãihiwe totihitawe.

to have the body painted with transverse lines. yãmonãmãritransversales.

I took the bow without arrows and leaned on it to walk. hãto mãroko ya nahi re tereiwei, ya paihou kuaaherima.

to lean on, to support oneself with. tereiwei.

like the Anteater was looking for (something), it raised its snout. teperiwe ke a taeo ha, hiyoka mi nonoãpraroma.

to raise the snout to sniff. ﬁyokaki.

old palm tree of pijiguao whose wood is very hard. famahi si.

old palm tree whose wood is very hard. famahi.

to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihoprou.

to smoke (in form). wehero.

dark and arched eyebrows. pei weyomahiki ushipi wathoa.

eyebrow. weyomahiki.

to tie, to bind, to tie up with a long rope (a load to carry on the back). prihãkei.

they break easily. se rompen fácilmente.

break. rompen.

I was present when they went away from the dwelling one after the other. ya no kuo tehe the pe hokeokema.

they went away from the dwelling one after the other. hokeokema.

to cut (in the indicated manner) in two. tihetiprai.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head, with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to put the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekeiku.

to straighten out, become rectilinear, correct oneself (terminative aspect). shaririprou.

offer food after having received it oneself. kahiki no koo.

be silent. kahiki ta okãpãri (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

mouth. kahiki.

to pierce, to make a hole (once) using a pointed object. hiroshai.

with his blowgun, he projected a dart in the direction of the momo fruits that hung in clusters. momo kosiki mi shimokore re weteteatayouwei ha the horaama (mit.

projected a dart in the direction of the fruits that hung in clusters. weteteatayouwei.

to be traced on it. tikekeamou.

while they were approaching, the demon of the shifting lands drew them in. pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

to approach, get close, draw near. ikuo.

his mother was really anguished. pe nii ke the puhi haruprou yaionowei.

to be anguished, to be distressed. harupramai.

the small bamboo point is really very sharp. rahaka ke a wai hitotowe totihiwe.

to be very sharp (a bamboo arrowhead). hitotowe.

to press, to squeeze. yarukeaprai.

to start doing something. haikiprai.

the sun declined over the horizon, then dusk came. the mothoka wai hiririoma, the mi weyarayoma.

to be near the horizon (a celestial body); to be at ground level. hiririoma.

to have the reflex of responding immediately to a shot or a blow. nokaprai.

fruit of the morã mahi tree. morã ma.

fruit of the morã mahi tree. morã.

1. To become frayed. 2. To lose its covering (fruit); to lose its skin.. warokoshiai.

to extend, to spread out, to become wide. hauhou.

sap of the hosho nouhi tree. hosho noupe.

sap, resin. noupe.

he came, left a termite nest on the ground, and went back to look for another. ai e koko ha prakiherini, ai ke e koko yuai mi hua re korayonow e i.

other, different. prakiherini.

to take refuge from the rain. wehenas.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to compress, to support on; to place one object on another to keep it in place. pateteai.

to feel unwell (terminative aspect). thareheprou.

he cut a banana leaf and planted it in the ground. ketipa hena ha pahetireni, hena ithãparema.

he cut. pahetireni.

they transformed into peremiraba and I saw that they were aiming their arrows at us. rahaka re pe ki re puhuruoperei: rariyoma (mit.

bamboo arrow tips. peremiraba.

to become loose (knot). prohohoai.

in what refers to water, we will not lack. pemaki rii yapekeope, mãu ke upe ha.

we will not lack (in reference to water). yapekeope.

1. To join a departing group at the last moment (the speaker is never the subject). 2. To constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole).. ayaprou.

to be angry. oiposhokomi.

to describe a rotational movement, to pivot. shimorerayou.

the váquiros are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were numerous rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothotho.

I'm going to establish my garden upriver. ora ha ke ya rii hikarimorãyou.

to work on one. hikari-mo-.

the ripe plantain smelled good, he ate several pieces that he cut with his incisors and finished it. kuratha a ni kreteri ha a ha weheriararini, a mi watherema.

to eat rapidly in that manner. weheriweherimou.

to evaporate completely. wehepei.

to throw bones out. popei.

he opened his hammock (hung it) and lay down. yii keki a ha kusherini a perioma.

he is lying in a cotton hammock. yii ke ki ha a peria kure.

cotton hammock. yii.

the Woman-toucan with the pubis pululant with lice. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

toucan. mayepu.

where is my capuchin monkey's tail. weti hami wishaye teshina.

at the moment when Titiri's tail was hanging down, Horonami killed him. titiri teshinaki ithãprao tehe horonamini a waikai shoaoma.

tail, stinger, caudal feather, tail of a mammal. teshina.

¿a qué lugar fueron a acampar en la selva. weti hami pei the pe wãyumi ayou kuhe.

camping. fwãyumi.

he thinned the bow. hãto ya nahi ishinapiprarema.

to make thinner. ishinapiprai.

what does it matter if we are left alone: they will go hunting (lit. pei peheki yãmio peo, totori the pe taepe.

to hunt, to participate in a long collective hunt; to search for enemies (lit.: to search for a turtle). taepe.

to lift without effort, for an instant. herehetai.

everyone knows that the tapirs are infested with ticks. shama pe ma re toripiwei.

are infested with ticks. toripiwei.

to descend several times in a row from the hammock. ãthomou.

to make frequent mistakes while speaking; to get tangled up repeatedly during a ceremonial dialogue. hãrohãi.

salpicado, manchado, sucio de arcilla o de tierra. kroapi.

when one lives in two neighboring dwellings, when one is close to the other, one does not fight (= one does not make war when one lives next to the other). pe peria ha heruruikini, pe tisusuayou, yãnomãmi the pe thamai ma re mai.

to be close together, to pile up, to hang one above the other. heruru.

Hokotoyoma had her hair cut regularly around her head (like a Yanomami woman). hokotoyoma ke the he wai yoothowe totihio yaioma.

to have hair growing back in the place of a tonsure. yoothou.

to extinguish a fire. koa wake rãiki.

to do it for a moment. hiitai.

he went outside and crouched from place to place on old, hard, rotten tree trunks. sipo hami ãmãrokoma ke pe hami a wãri tikeataroma.

to go outside and crouch from place to place on dead, hard tree trunks. tikeataroma.

don't stay in the house, you will take strength (it is what is advised to young people to make them go to the forest to look for food or to hunt). yahi ha kuo mai ke, wa rohotheri.

to take strength (child); to become old. rohothorayou.

show him immediately how to do it, if not he will get into difficulties: "this is how you have to do it", tell him that immediately. a ta wea shoaki, a puhi wetinahamou tao: "e naha wa the thatape", wa e kuu ha shoaoni.

tell/inform immediately. shoaoni.

tree. kohiki.

he put me next to a thick tree like this, with my arms held against my body (the speaker imitates the gesture), he also made me as small as he could. e naha kuwe the hi ha ya hiririoma, wãisipi yokokowe ya kuoma.

to have the arms held against the body. yokokowe.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying and swinging the torso and arms; to tremble (the surface of water). rahurahumo.

to bend, to curve, to arch (perfective). ithorerayou.

there was nothing more than a single hammock of bejuco, no other occupied the place. tahiapi thoku shiro kuoma, ai ke the hishiki kutaope ha kunomai.

to be loaded with many objects. kutaope.

to get tongue-tied frequently when speaking. aka hãrehewe.

to get tongue-tied, to stammer. ãrehe.

to get oneself painted by someone. yãprãmorãyou.

his older brother gave us two food. pe ãiwepini pehereki iyamama.

gave food to. iyamama.

1. to peel the seeds of the yopo plant, 2. peeled yopo seeds. iprushi.

wood split in that way. yahathoma.

life. vida.

he is already dead. a no prea waikia.

to be dead. prea.

as they had exhausted the firewood for heating, they quickly climbed up the posts that support the communal shelter roof. koã ãsho pe mi ha watherini rope pe tuoproma, totahima pe hami.

to exhaust, to consume entirely. watherini.

synonym of usutua. yeketi.

to fail to climb a tree. yohehai.

to start peeling with circular motions (as an apple is peeled with a knife). shokekeprai.

Its succulent roots are edible. Pl.

cultivated plant, lairén; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). allouia.

interested. makasi.

construct a large one. the ta praukuku.

to extend, to enlarge, to make extensive. praukukei.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

to descend vertically. wahohoi.

apresúrate a colgar tu chinchorro debajo del de tu esposo. haheãrohe ke iha a ta pepia ta haiiku.

your husband. haheãrohe.

the arrow just got caught (when falling). shereka a hãã re tikoikuhe.

to get caught/hooked. tikoikuhe.

the large carrying basket is gray like the earth. wii ke a pata mimou koshi: el gran canasto de carga está gris como la tierra.

gray, earth-colored, stained with earth. kroke.

I will sharpen the sticks. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (plural objects). yakekeprarei.

being deloused. nomahaciéndose.

As they wanted to take possession of his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

I took the gallineta from a hawk (that had killed it). koikoimi iha hãshimo ya he rumakema.

1. Protect someone. 2. Recover (a stolen good from a thief); take possession of (the wife of a murdered man, the prey of a predator). ruamai.

he placed the arrows on the ground abruptly. shereka ke ki re pratakeiwei.

to place something on the ground suddenly or abruptly. pratakei.

the fish parted the fishing line. yurini matiriawe ãsittha uhetirema.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

fish. yurini.

to do it for a moment. hiitai.

agarró la mascada hecha con tabaco verde (sin secar), y se la llevó. the pata nii ashi re furihireheriiwei (mit.

agarró. furihireheriiwei.

none of us found anything. yamaki no pruka pahateanomi.

to not obtain any result during a search, to work uselessly, to waste time. no ohe.

to break into little pieces. remakashirayou.

to stubbornly insist for a moment before changing attitude. yatitou.

the woman could liberate herself from me. huko siki yacapar.

to liberate oneself, to free oneself. yacapar.

to have become thin, to be corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisirayou.

to know perfectly the world of the h ek u r a. ftai mi rekeketou (cha.

know. tai.

it took us a long time to reach the last part of the journey and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top/summit of a hill or mountain, to climb to the top, to be at the top/summit. poushuku.

to stand upright. yororoãi.

to separate to live. poakaai.

if you refuse to do it I will throw dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to throw dirt (sand, mud) once at a person, to punish a child in that way. pahuai.

I caught a fish. Uu a si pe ke wake.

fish, picúa. a si.

(he/she/it) kills. she-i.

to kill. matar.

tree that has slid on its stump without falling. fhi tihea.

1. tree that slides on its stump without falling after being cut (usually gets caught on other trees); 2. to graze, touch lightly. itihe.

declared. thareiwei.

where (is it). weti hami.

where the one X's mouth calls father is (lit. X kahiki re hiimouwei.

where is it said to be (on the ground). weti the re kure hami the hoã praa.

where. hami.

to close the hands. fimiki puushitou.

to close the hands. puushitou.

to knock down something (e.g. a dangerous insect) with a quick hand gesture, or using an object (a swatter, a lid, etc.). yatheprai.

he would hit the yuvías (fruits) against people's noses, and break them that way. yãnomãmi the hushi pe ha hawari kokoki sheama, koko yahathomakema.

1. to break or crack by falling, to split as a result of a shock (a round object); 2. to split wood by striking one end against the ground or something hard, to break a spherical object by hitting it with a stick, to open the shell of a woody fruit by striking it against something; 3. wood split in this way. yahatho.

when there is nothing to eat one does not have much desire to work (lit. enaha re sipe oheprou kuo totihio, the pe aohotamapou ma re mai.

to have no desire to work. aohotamapou.

your niece, the daughter of your sister, the wife of your son. thathehe.

he crushed leaves with his fingers repeatedly. yãã ke henaki wãri ha hurukutaararini.

he crushed leaves with his fingers repeatedly (to have luck in the search for honey). hurukutaararini.

to make something locally thicker or denser. suprakei.

(they) were putting the Yanomami far away. yãnomãmi ke the ki payeketaa waikikema.

to put something somewhere (durative, plural object). payomai.

remove the bowstrings from their bows. hãto ke nahi pe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

remove the bowstring. hayurarihe.

to produce waves. turereai.

the demon of the night always sang in a plaintive manner in the place where it used to perch. titiri a re ropraanowei hami a shiro miã ikima (mit.

sang in a plaintive manner. ropraanowei.

lightning season. fihirãma sh tehe.

lightning, sunlight. fihirãma.

When he heard Lizard, Hairless One was afraid. refariwe a wã hiriai tehe nãroriwe a kirirariyoma.

he/she/it had fear, was afraid. kirirariyoma.

to get down from the hammock and line up in the central plaza before leaving for a war expedition. wayu ithou.

consume totally oneself. watherei.

they make the earth crumble to reach the otter. proro a wãri pakekaihe.

to cut an animal into several pieces. pakekai.

we came out of the water at the place where the path is, we walked for a while on flat ground, and then we sat down. yo re hashiriawei ha yamaki ha hashiriikini, yamaki he ha yariyaritaikini, yamaki rokei.

we came out of the water. hashiriawei.

to have hair that is too long, to the point that it covers the nape. potoshiwe.

the people of Poriporimapiwei detested us a lot. poriporimapiwei theri peni wamareki napemai meparoomahe: los de Poriporimapiwei nos detestaban mucho.

Why would we detest each other. weti ellos la guerra.

to detest, to hate, to have an aversion towards someone. napemai.

to have dried (water of a pond or lagoon), to have evaporated (cooking water of a food). wehetia.

clear, limpid, translucent, white. herushi.

to split, divide, separate a part from a whole. shererekããi.

como no querían desistir, se pusieron a gemir unos tras otros. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to not want to desist, to persist in doing something. maoheni.

the bananas are planted (too) close together. kuratha siki tia no shatitiwe.

to plant closely together, to pack tightly. kothethe.

to unravel, untwist, or fray continuously. kusheshou.

the river is rising. u petii.

to be full; to be satisfied; to be swollen (watercourse). petii.

no deshagas el collar para regalar las mostacillas puesto que no has respondido favorablemente al pedido de mi cuñado (= si no le das a uno, no le des al otro). tope ke ki wetitihe shoriwe ke wa wã huai ma re maohe.

acceder a un pedido, aceptar hacer el amor (mujer). wetitihe.

if I were a snake. ya oru kunoha.

expresses a conditional longing, realizable or not. kunoha.

1. To cook directly over the fire (without hanging). 2. To replace a shoot after having extracted the roots or tubers (ocumo or cassava). tirerea.

to have a sinuous or broken line painted on the face. mi eyekea.

ya el calor ardiente del demonio omãyãri se difunde por mi pecho. heyoshi pakayua waikipariyo kuhe.

ardiente. waikipariyo.

to curve an object, to give it the shape of an arc of a circumference. payokoamai.

wild rabbit; Silvilagus brasiliensis (Leporidae). fãfã.

to be or put oneself in the middle of a line of people moving, or in the middle part of a canoe. poushokupramou.

he slowly removed the large stone he was wearing around his neck and blocked the hole with it. maa ke ma pata opi hayuu ha kuparuni a ka kahua shoakema.

It is I, the one who wears the harpy eagle headdress, who is passing by. watoshe mohomi ya hayuai e.

to remove something worn around the neck. hayuu.

he smoothed quickly the foot of the horoeti tree. horoeti re hi pata koro re tãihitamarini.

to smooth several objects. tãihirei.

the child, who was clever, passed (from the guatura where he was) to a tree and stayed perched there. ihiru a puhi re moyawei, hii ha a ha piyeikuni, a tikeo heoma.

to pass or move from one place to another. piyeikuni.

I am in a period of scarcity (lit. ya no ohea ke a kure.

to be in a period of scarcity, to lack food. ohea.

to form a circle. mi hetutu.

to form a circle. hetutu.

lightning. tãhimi.

to become scarce. resheshãprou.

as those who were walking in front changed direction again, we slid towards them crouched. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction suddenly. akehetamai.

he ate. a iyama.

he left. a hurayoma.

for a long time we remained grouped. yamaki hiratao heatima.

they killed their older brother. pe ãiwepi a sheremahe.

he came to join us. a warokeyoruma.

declarative past marker. -mahe.

to massage oneself for a moment. hutetetou.

the animals that move on the trees were the first of all to climb. isi hami pe re huuwei, pe hititiwe tua pariketayoma.

were the first to climb. pariketayoma.

to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. tetekeai.

to lose one. moyepirayou.

to emerge, come out. ureprou.

tree that gets stuck on its stump when falling. hi tihe.

1. (Verb Intransitive) tree that gets stuck on its stump when falling 2. (Verb Transitive) to graze, touch lightly. tihe.

go there (you two) to prepare a mixture of seje fruit with water. hoko upe ta yarupikutu.

go take the child there, he is afraid. ihiru a ta komakutu, a kirii.

away, at a distance. tayo.

he/she/it will reappear here. a petou kooyorupe.

he/she/it will reappear here. kooyorupe.

to scratch once. hukekai.

sondearon el agua con sus pies buscando a la nutria. kihami proro ke a kapamahe.

sondearon el agua con sus pies buscando a la nutria. kapamahe.

to change direction (after having followed the same orientation for a long time). aketou.

to open, to split (the end of a long object). shetetai.

that is downstream. koro ha the kuakirioa.

at the foot of the arrow canes of the Yawari passes the path of the jaguar village. yawari pe sherekapi si koro hami irari pe no mãyo pata re wãkirãkiri (cha.

downstream, downriver. koro.

to be hungry. mishinama.

enter whistling into a dwelling (a visitor). koikoimo.

(they purify) with 'the water of the hekura'. hekura pe mãupi.

formula used by shamans when purifying a patient with . mãupi.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

nuca (back of the neck). femaka.

to hang near the ground, to tie low (multiple objects). yahatotomai.

Ay, my eyes are already burning. ya mamo pe fraai re waikia tikore ye e.

the chili pepper burns my eye. praki ani yare mamo fraamai.

to burn the eyes, irritate the skin. fraai.

the tobacco is becoming moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to mold, to become moldy. rohoro.

fried food. fhãrikã no.

fried food, ready to be consumed. fhãrikã.

she had put red flowers in her earlobes, and she looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

to put something in the earlobe (a stick, feathers, flowers, etc.). huureni.

to unravel, untwist, or fray completely (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). kushesherayou.

what do his threats matter, he wastes his saliva in vain. aka ha hoprarini a wã tetea pea.

I imagine that he expresses himself badly (lit. aka moyepi ke the.

tongue. aka.

Yoreriyoma (= Mujer-hongo) mourned her son and lamented. yoreriyoma pe ihirupi a no miã poma.

whom are you crying for. weti ke wa the no miã pou.

to cry for a dead person or pet, to mourn and express it by crying; to lament. ãmoãmo.

was. estaba.

río abajo (allí donde vivo) no tengo machete, vamos a la selva sin llevarnos nada (lit. koro hami ya pe sipara thapou mai, yamaki shiroko tutuai totihio kuperei.

la mujer no tenía hijos. suwe shiroko a kuoma.

without, lacking. fshiro.

the beehive is really splendid, let's drink the honey (mixed with water). puu ke a topraa yaia, pema u ta koa.

to drink. koai.

to bend, to curve (multiple objects). hithoremai.

lagoon that is. thookoroai.

the plant of the birds of prey occupies a wide surface. koikoimi henaki pata re upraa re yaweterakiri ye.

occupying a wide surface. yaweterakiri.

we went into the water a little downriver. y amaki ithoa korohokema.

a little downriver. fkoroho.

he. waya.

to have a swollen lymph node in the groin. moshipepi.

preparar varios paquetes de comida para cocinarlos sobre las brasas. hãrohãromou.

he went down again (along the tree trunk). the ithoa theri ha kothoherini.

sit down (at the foot of the tree, the speaker is perched on it). a ta rotho.

to go down, to descend. kuthoheri.

I slept for a moment. no owe ya mitariyoma.

to sleep for a moment. mitariyoma.

source. fihete u ka.

it clung to the treetop, which bent under its weight, and stretched out its neck to see. hii ke the hi wai ihete noshi hariraai ha a oraki kayahaapraroma.

source, tip, extremity. fihete.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on top of the basket to keep it in place. maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

The cries of Woman-picure went far away. thomiriyoma ke a wã wãhami a kopema.

Woman-picure (a mythological figure). thomiriyoma.

to open, to leave ajar. ãikiãmai.

to grow (child). hatukeai.

I soak the wapu fruits. wapu ya ki he paoai.

I will cover the wapu fruits with water (while cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to soak, to submerge. paoku.

(if I do that) I will get thorns stuck (in the flesh). ya misikipirariyo.

to get thorns or spines stuck in the flesh. mimisi.

to put yellow, paint, color yellow (locally). ashiamai.

we arrived at the other side (of the hill or mountain). chinkutapareyoruuwei.

to shake the head when one has wet hair (to remove water). fhe yomikiprou.

to jerk the bent arm to recover from a blow or shake it when it is sore, or to restore blood circulation when experiencing tingling; to shake the head when the hair is wet (to remove water). yomikiprou.

to feel a tickle in the throat when having a cold. horerewe.

boa constrictor (Boidae). hetureriwe.

during the night, the hekura come one by one to shake the hammock rope, they wake you up. titi ha hekura peni thoku thaki pe yomipraaihe, pe the hushuuhe.

out of anger, he put his head between his crossed arms. a hushuoripi mohe pokema.

1. to wake someone up; 2. to attack; 3. to act impulsively out of anger. hushuu.

that can be taught. weamou.

you (plural) have not given me onoto. a no nanapi no yããi ma re mãoprei.

you (plural) have not given me. mãoprei.

"try it, you two", said Toucan. kahe ke wahekini the ta wapepraapi.

try it, you two. wapepraapi.

to become slippery inside (of an object). takraai.

There is a nest of oi bees in a young motua tree over there. kiha ko oi ke pe yetea kupiyeheri, motua oshetiwe ke hi ha.

1. To be good for harvesting (palm heart). 2. To become very sharp.. osheti.

pole at the end of the roof to keep the last row of braided leaves in place. an en la extremidad del techo para mantener en su sitio la última hilera de hojas trenzadas.

pole. an.

to keep a person immobilized by holding their arms against their body. okokomapou.

be silent at once. pe matha ta waitaru.

the child had become suddenly silent (underground). ihiru ke a matha re waitapariyonowei (mit.

the shamans who were healing in the house, became suddenly silent. the pe nohi re reayouwei, the matha waiprapei.

to become suddenly silent, to fall suddenly silent. waitaru.

I rub the wapu fruits against the bottom of a basket. wapu ya ki hipii.

to start rubbing toxic fruits against the wall of a basket. hipiprai.

he approached to see. the mii mi re ikukeiwei.

to approach, to get close. ikukei.

in the site where they usually place their canoe on the shore. kanawa ke pe makepraai re totihio tharahei ha.

they killed the person whose son lives in another community (lit. ihi re ihirupi hoã wãri perihou ma re kui pe wãri sherema ha tharahei.

place, location, site. tharahei.

(they) immobilized (him/her). mi hetuturei.

to immobilize a person by standing on each side and holding their arms. hetuturei.

the ancestors made each other bleed (fought among themselves and caused wounds). no patapi pe iyepe yapikamayou no kupereshi (mit.

do not cease to visit us, since you claim goods (lit. yoku matha waiamai tikootihe, wamaki ma re nakouwei.

he was advancing along the path. pei yo hami a kuaaherima.

reciprocal. yo.

I got lost. ya mohorurayom a.

got lost. orurayou.

Horonami suddenly saw him and asked: "Who are you. horonami re a mamo kepraa ha yaiikuni, "-weti pei wa ta thawe. ". ".

suddenly, unexpectedly. -weti.

to strike with the foot during a fight (a bird). kakekeai.

hearth where a deceased person lived. hãto nahi no prea.

place where a collective dwelling used to stand in the past. hãto nahi wãnoka.

dwelling, house. nahi.

lie here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

to lie in opposite directions (with the head next to the feet of the other) in a hammock. yoteo.

los Waika viven allá y fabrican puntas de bambú shiiwe. ei rahaka shiiwe ki re peyepiyei.

puntas de bambú. peyepiyei.

to build several temporary shelters or camps (at different times) in the same place. fyãno yarikamai.

to hit someone repeatedly with a stick or club; to build several temporary shelters or camps (at different times) in the same place. yarikamai.

null. mapoori.

cacao grain. poforoa.

A repulsive being that guards the fire where the souls of the greedy are consumed. Watawatawe.

they wrapped their excrement in leaves and threw it (over the roof). shii pe ha hãromaheni, the pe hãro sheyemahe.

they wrapped their excrement in leaves. hãromaheni.

(food/prey/fish) that swells and rises to the surface of the water in which it is cooked. hiterayou.

de nuevo me invitaron. yare nakapou koohe.

to invite, to solicit. horomo.

He defended himself (speaking). Nakre wã no huo.

to defend oneself (speaking). nakre.

thanks to the soap, it will certainly become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

soap. fapomi.

don't hit them (the bats, with your arrows) or the okã will come. pe he yoatihe, okã ke pe.

to hit on the head with a stick (a person, an animal), to strike with the end of an elongated object (stick or arrow), to hit flying animals with the end of one or more arrows. yoapei.

small bird. tehitehi.

I make a ring with the vine. thoo ya thotho motoreprai.

to start forming a circle or ring. motoreprai.

1. to wear out a little, 2. worn out. ruroho.

several dents. wãhihirayou.

the messenger of the party appeared suddenly in the dwelling saying: tu, tu, tu. tu, tu, tu.

to appear suddenly in a dwelling or path. haprariyoma.

to speak with a distinct accent or dialect different from the local speech. ãhiãmo.

las niguas se desprenden (de los pies adonde están alojadas). ihu nape hayoyai.

niguas. ihu.

to make someone give up, to make someone change their mind. kuyemarei.

you will remember this. hatukeope.

null. werowero.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) in order to search for something underneath them. Pokorariyoma.

sondearon el agua con sus pies buscando a la nutria. kihami proro ke a kapamahe.

sondearon el agua con sus pies buscando a la nutria. kapamahe.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and smash your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to invite oneself to a meal, to join a group of people who are eating. hetuo.

the young people never stay still. huya the pe yãnikio ma re mai.

to be calm; to stop going from one place to another, to stop agitating uselessly. yãnikio.

to begin to grow large (a tobacco plant). kumamasiãi.

to keep fixed. mamoku royokãi.

to keep fixed. royoko.

to be beautiful, to grow well (all plants). tiririwe.

to blow. puruu.

they fled to the forest. urihi hami pe tokurayoma.

the otter escaped immediately. proro ke a wãri tokua shoarayoma.

to flee, to escape. tokuu.

I will hang the little deer in the hole of my earlobe (to carry it). kamiyeni pei ya yimikaki ha preãri ya wai huuai shoaowe.

hole/cavity of the earlobe. shoaowe.

to paint circles on one's body, to have painted circles on one's body. oni rohahao.

to paint circles on one. rohahao.

to be absent, to leave. haikou.

to strip off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pahathoai.

designates various species of birds of the genus Notharchus sp. (Bucconidae). mãuhutu.

to move the head from side to side (in a sign of negation). yãwetetou.

(it) tears apart, falls apart. rehihiai.

to tear apart, to fall apart. rehihi.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

food that has been chewed. wãshikã.

to start making a container whose opening is narrower than the base. iyoyoprai.

extend the hand (for me to give you something). imiki ta totoiku.

extend the hand. totoiku.

although the shamans treated him, he died. a nohi reama ma kui, a nomai he yatirayom a.

to treat, to cure (a patient, by a shaman). nohi reai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). hushuhushu.

be attentive while you walk. a ta moyaweaheri.

please, here we have to start being prudent. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to be prudent, vigilant, attentive; to be on guard. moyawei.

to fill up to the brim. he maniki.

he arrived home carrying the woman on his back. yãnomãmi ke the suwe ha yehireherini a kãi kopema.

come on, kill me (lit: come on, carry me on your back). pei, yare ta yehireheri.

to carry on one. yehireheri.

to be seated askew. froo kayare.

to become twisted, to put askew. kayare.

to cut, tear a strip (in a fabric, for example); to separate, choose; to flatten, make flat. makokoai.

1. To tangle (unidentified tree or animal) 2. (Botanical term for an unidentified tree, literally . shi wãrihi.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into pieces several times to eat it. makosiamai.

to cut or tear a narrow strip of something. makosikei.

cállate, suegro, deja de amenazar. shoape, mamikai, a wã teteotihe.

to threaten someone. teteotihe.

to stay for a long time in the center. tharitao.

when Siroromi stood up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

to press or hold the legs together against each other. hututukei.

light-colored, pale. ossólo.

supernatural beings of the yai the class, they can cause diseases and take possession of a person. hekrãhekrãri.

small dome formed by earthworm excrement on the surface of the earth. kahakohihipi.

beings. hekãhekãri.

to be always talking. wã pakihi.

I am the song of the Yoreshiãriwe Spirit that passes before you. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope ye.

I already spoke with the women, I told them: "cry for the dead", I asked them to cry for the dead. suwe ya pe nowã thaa waikirei kuhe, "pe ta ãmoãmo, pe ta heri".

to sing, to hum; euphemistically: to cry for the dead. ãmoãmo.

vine or climbing plant. ãshitho.

to crackle. hãimou.

don't cry (to the dead). pe ikii mai pe ta kuo.

to cry, to weep. ikii.

Hilera de hojas trenzadas del techo de un shapono. yãprãwe.

the child approached, he stopped in front of him (and said): "father, father. ihiru re a ikukema, a upraa fa wariritaruni : "fape, fape. ". ".

he stopped in front of him. wariritaruni.

(no translation provided). nakasiki warirorewe.

a young girl, a daughter, a younger sister, a parallel cousin, or any young girl to whom one wants to show affection. nakasi.

he fills up to. he iyeke.

to fill up to. iyeke.

en el centro (de la tela), allí donde es densa, el Espíritu-araña estaba acurrucado. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

acurrucado. puushitaoma.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent under the weight of the tapir climbing on it. kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei.

to bend under weight. totionowei.

Follow me, you will capture a small enemy (= follow me, you will kill an enemy). ware ke wa ihirupi huweape, a nosi ta yauiku.

to capture, to seize, to grab, to take possession of (a single object). huweape.

incest. mota.

we slept during the night and then descended from the mountain (upon waking in the morning). yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descended by a slope. timirayou.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be damaged, crushed (end of a long object) [perfective]. thekehekei.

it's because I observed the place where you fought. wamaki wetiayope ha ya mamo shatikema kutaeni.

to fight, to be at war. wetiayou.

the egg of the gallineta that you cooked (at a certain time of the day). hãshimo wa nathe re hariprei.

it is what I said (a moment ago). ya wã ma re haprei.

it was here a moment ago. haprei.

to put tobacco to dry over the fire. pee nahe shirikai.

I will put tobacco to dry (over the fire, in several stages) and, when it is dry, I will bring it. pee ya naheki shirikipraiwe, the ki ha shirikiprarini ya the ki peraayoruuwe.

to put to dry tobacco over the fire. shirikai.

to make a domesticated bird perch, to let someone make a bird perch, to wait for a bird to perch before shooting an arrow at it. fromai.

to make a domesticated bird perch, to let someone make a bird perch, to wait for a bird to perch before shooting an arrow at it. fromai.

Are you still awake. wa rãã shoaa re a kure.

to be awake. rãã.

peeled yopo grains. hiprushirarei.

to stay underneath. pepitao.

you will come to me to beg for tobacco. pee nahe pe ha kamiye ke iha wa nakouwe.

to beg, to ask for. nakouwe.

to shorten something. onohoprou.

brother, above all don't go to that place. wãri fuu kuikuhe.

over all, above all, especially. -tihe.

to frequently miss the target. sinamou.

now the waters (of the flood) are near. hei tehe the u re ahetore e.

near. ahetore.

Bring me (carrying on your back) a jaguar mandible. wa ki re homomaiwei, weti ipa naki ta yehimapa.

mandible (literally: tooth, used here for mandible). homomaiwei.

the jaguar broke off the dog's head with its teeth (myth). irani hiima ke he wahetiprai ha kuparuni (mit.

the tip/end of something. los wã hira.

he was wielding a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to wield, to brandish (something over one. yarehepoma.

and here they are, arriving one after another, coming to live in my chest. wa ki kuorani, wa ki peripraai ta kuparuhani.

arriving one after another. peripraai.

I put it in the center (perfective, plural object). mi tharikakei.

I am putting it in the center (durative, plural object). mi tharimai.

to put something in the middle, in the center. tharikei.

inflorescence of the konopo palm. konopo ãthe: inﬂorescencia de la palma konopo si.

inflorescence of the konopo palm. konopo ãthe.

(in a myth): they were already hanging by their arms, the ancestors had turned into sloths. the pe yakukuprawe waikiwe ha, poreri ke the ihamarariyoma.

to hang or be hanging by the arms; to be hanging by arms and legs with the head down (like sloths), to hang with all one. yakukuo.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then pressed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to crush by rubbing with the fingers; to crumble in the hand, to crush leaves when abandoning a path, for good luck during a search. hurukukei.

to practice an opening in a hollow cylindrical object: to open a hollow trunk (by striking). pareshekei.

sound that arrows make when falling. toumou.

The mushroom sprouts on dead wood; it is edible. Shiãshirimi brota sobre la madera muerta; es comestible.

mushroom (unidentified (animal, plant)). shiãshirimi.

to become perforated, to crack in several parts (terminative). waresheprou.

we advanced slowly in a line. fririhoherima.

we advanced slowly in a line. fririhoherima.

name. tonaun.

to have made several scratches. iprushirariyoma.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

club. garrote.

to predict that, to foretell. ihita.

to become dirty or opaque on the surface. ukosirariyo.

él le ofreció un recipiente repleto de compota de plátano. poreaweni tate u pe ithãkema.

plátano. oreaweni.

to start making clear or translucent. erushiprai.

he is very thin. rasirasima thotho.

to be very thin. rasirasima.

cave or burrow. kotokewe.

to allow a young woman to leave the space where she was confined after her first menstruation. shopohoprai.

to exchange reciprocally (the same object, at the same moment). nomihãyou.

to hold with the hand, to transport an object holding it with the hand. yepi.

to have been entirely dirtied, stained. hãhiãma.

(when fishing) fish not biting. imãprou.

trace, mark from the previous day. fweyawe.

he is angry. hokotomari uthãhi.

to be angry. hokotomari.

to constitute several groups of people or gathered objects. kokãprãwe.

in the place inhabited by the soul of Yãmonãmãriwe, the bees immediately took flight (= the bees fled immediately and took refuge in the land of souls). yãmonãmãriwe re a no porepi re perirati hami, puu nari re pe hetua katitia re shorayouwei.

mythological ancestor. yãmonãmãriwe.

to be aligned (in a natural way). rãyowe.

Exclamation of surprise or amazement. shio!.

they made a crunching sound as they walked on the dry leaves. the pe shurushurupraroma.

making a crunching sound (from walking on dry leaves or dense vegetation). shurushurua.

the true tobacco species. pee nahe yai.

they two made the (first) true bamboo tips and also it can be The word 'yai' in Yanomami means '(verb with adverbial function, emphasizes the reality of the action)'. rahaka yai re the ki tapia re piyerareiwei.

are there really mamure vines. masi kua yairawe.

true, real, authentic. yai.

to cause someone to startle. ãtipramai.

they penetrated into the conuco (crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hay u o m a.

they crossed the morichal (palm grove) and left it behind. eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

to pass through, cross over, leave behind. hatakeiwei.

to be placed on top of each other. yareho.

to be happy. poyoitawe.

I mounted a canoe with some non-indigenous people and it was on that occasion that I saw the Roca-del-Espíritu-baba for the first time. nape ihami ya ha tikeaimani iwariwe ya ma hapa tararema.

to mount or ride on a canoe. tikeaimani.

to weave tightly the strands of a basket. hisiniprai.

to weave tightly the strands of a basket. hisiniprai.

in the conuco I protected the avocado tree with a row of sticks placed in a circle around it. hikari theka hami ãhãi ya hi he ithorokoverbo rema.

to surround, encircle; to protect a plant by placing sticks around it; to construct a dwelling with a circular roof. hea.

to move by jumping, as frogs do. yutuyutumou.

to be/exist in a location. kura.

to tremble for a moment. rayukuprou.

to begin to break, crush, smash. karesheprai.

to keep an object in place by pressing it with the hand or putting a weight on it. hikipou.

when I reached the top (feeling dizzy) I wondered what I was going to do. kihami ya re heakaai totihio kuhe tehe, weti naha wa ta thawe ya puhi kutaroma.

to rise above, to reach the top of, to elevate above, to rise to the sky. heakaai.

the girl that they raptured when they attacked us, they are certainly carrying her (on their back). suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

they raptured. tereiwehei.

they did not think of ambushing on the plain at nightfall. weyate, heyari ha yamaki ha ta yereiku, the pe kuu mai.

I arrived at nightfall and slept. weyate re ya ha koponi ya mioma.

sunset, dusk, nightfall. heyari.

I'm going with the others to fetch water. mãu ya u ta ishakomai nareo sho.

to join others to go fetch water from the river (humorous). ishakomai.

bring here your ugly crooked arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

bring here. yehipoyo.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

to launch over, to throw higher than. morokomarei.

they (two) followed downstream the river of spells. heritha u ha ke kipi mi werema.

you spend your time going down the river course (to come and steal cambures), when you return. rokomi wama ãsi pe nape hore mi wereweremou ma kui, wamaki wãri ohei kookiriowei ke the.

to have descended a river course walking downstream. wererayou.

we went among several to get the firewood we needed (to cook) the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

firewood. thariki.

you do not have the appearance of being someone who feels fear. fwa the no wai hore kiriihipi ke.

to not have the appearance of being someone who feels fear. kiriihipi.

to be decorated with a circle. oni rohahaa.

to be decorated with a circle. rohahaa.

to bite (one or more times, said of snakes). warikiai.

during the ritual of a girl's first menstruation. unokãimou.

ritual of a girl. unokãi.

he remained standing in the central plaza. fhehã hami a upraoma.

central plaza. fhehã.

de nada te valdrá tener un fusil de caza, tu sangre manará a chorros, eso es lo que te ocurrirá. kopeta re a wãri ma kuo tehe, iyeiye re ke ki pata ﬁreﬁremou totihia ha, kahe ke iha.

rifle, shotgun. mokawa.

to start twisting or softening a vine or bark. yaproteprai.

prop up the mortar quickly with short logs. kihi the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ãsho horotow e n i.

to prop up, to support (perfective of the durative form). paihiakei.

to reach a medium size; to go from a large size to a medium size, to reduce in that way. prowehou.

to have finished putting white down on one. horoimamorayou.

to decorate totally several objects with crosses. yakirararei.

brusquely, he put his hand on the inclined leaves. enaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to peel the grains of yopo, to scratch oneself, to place one. iprushiai.

Shu. shu. (personal name), the one who has a rough forehead (insult). huko wãri re ãrokiwei a wãri re periope.

to have been completely dried or smoked. ãrokima no.

to dry, to harden. ãroki.

After having climbed the trunk, Toucan slid down it. mayepirithawe ke a waroroaprarou ha kuparuni, a ha torereapraroni (mit.

to slide down a tree trunk. warorou.

speech of upriver. ﬁshomi.

ritual of isolation and purification performed by women having their first period (and their husbands); ritual state of those who have committed or participated in a homicide. unokai mou.

to perform the ritual of isolation and purification. unokai mou.

protruding navel (offensive). fyimotha poyoyowe.

to protrude, to overhang, to jut out. poyoyowe.

¿han terminado ustedes de pintarse el cuerpo. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

pero, ¿a dónde se han ido ellos. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

¿los has encontrado. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

madre, ¿les has ofrecido carne (a los visitantes). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

perfective verb form. RV2.

they became amahiri immediately. amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

evil spirits that cause disease. amaﬁri.

when you shoot a short arrow at an animal, you will always hit it, a longer one will always go too far. yaro wa niyai ha horotowe ani wa katitai, rape a he piyehou tehe.

go further, go beyond, exceed. piyehou.

euphemism to announce the death of a certain woman (lit. pukuye ãsi mashi rukea.

strap used to carry babies. wãremashi.

Place where a feline has scratched the ground after urinating or defecating. ira mohutha.

1. Place where a feline has scratched the ground after urinating or defecating. 2. Place where those on an expedition ambushed (during a ceremonial dialogue).. mohutha.

the two small partridges gathered a hardened and deformed caterpillar from cooking. prihãhã.

the two small partridges gathered a hardened and deformed caterpillar from cooking. prihãhã.

to be dark. ruwe.

listen to me carefully. yimika ta hirãrãparu.

listen to me carefully. hirãrãparu.

they ruin the effect of the hallucinogens. epena ke a wayu wãriãi kutuhei.

ruin, destroy the effect of. kutuhei.

speech of upriver. fesikakiwe.

to stay behind for a short while. ãyoriprao.

when the great fire was blazing vigorously, Siroromi appeared. wake pata waowaomou tehe siroromi a petariyoma.

to flame, to blaze producing flames. wakei.

he was afraid of the arrows. a kirirariyoma.

he was generous with his bamboo arrows (lament). ipa rafakapi totooreelowe ke.

bamboo arrow. marariyo.

to transform into a vampire bat (mythological). emida.

to empty little by little. mathokoai.

some women had placed (there) tobacco. suwe theni pee ke pe nahe wãri no maketakiraheshi.

they had placed (there). maketakiraheshi.

they crossed the morichal (and left it behind). eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

we, the ones who passed (the river), are the people of Shishito. shishito theri yamaki re hayuope.

they passed, they crossed. hayuyou.

to have clenched teeth. wãsinio.

there were knives, but the two children damaged them and now there are no more. kushiyo re pe kuoma ma kui ihiru ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

to damage, to destroy. wãriãpini.

upstream speech. ãpuru uﬁ.

speech. uﬁ.

to tear or cut lengthwise, to tear or cut a strip from the edge of an object. sherirai.

to be inferior to, to be shorter than. hawehewe.

Plural of wapu. Pl.

wapu hu naki: flowers of the wapu kohi tree. wapu hu naki: ﬂores del árbol wapu kohi.

to eat them. wapu.

to be very thin. thohuthohumo.

bolsa de plástico. matiriawe.

The Yanomami think that all harpy eagles. Los Yãnomãmi piensan que todas las arpyjaa.

harpy eagle. harpyjaa.

gala arrow that the hekura possess. shereka piremari.

gala. piremari.

it is claimed that the eyes of dolphins have power, they make women fall in love. tonina suwe ke iha pe mamo hoã wayu, pe nohiãmou.

to awaken friendship or love. nohiãmou.

to obstruct a place. paimimarei.

tonsure. he roshi.

tonsure. roshi.

to massage oneself (to relieve a hutuka). huteteo.

They perform the paushimou ritual. Tha shiki paushimou.

paushimou. paushimou.

She was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. yãmonãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe heparohowe a wãri kuoma.

She was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. yãmonãriyoma.

(the pulp) of the banana is reddish. kuratha a si teãyãwe.

to be reddish locally. teãyãã.

¿por qué renunciaron a querer matarlos. nape kuyeweti ke wa the nape tuo.

renounce to want to kill. yekemahe.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and crush your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to repel, to push away. heturuni.

no, I will not go out again. sipoo koo taomi.

to go out, to exit. sipoai.

I don't have the desire to go hunting, I don't have the desire to go far away. ya rami no hupimi, ya no prahapimi.

to not have the desire to go hunting, to not have the desire to go far away. prahapimi.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to that by which they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a wild beast that was pursuing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to leave behind in a short time a certain place by walking fast. toretakei.

they already killed several enemies. pe the matoﬁ yuoprou waikia ke a kuhe.

to kill enemies (lit.: to take possession of goods). yuoprou.

in a place where the ground was bulging, there were manaka palms. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha manaka si pe kuoma.

convex, rounded, bulging. yeprihiwe.

curare (a poisonous plant extract). mamokori.

to salt (perfective form). mositimarei.

I did not remain calm, I stayed awake complaining until dawn. ya wai hore yãnikiprou mai, ya rããwã teteo he haruma.

to finish an obligatory task; to remain calm after having worked. yãnikiprou.

to deepen the interior of an object, to make a cavity deeper. koehekei.

to be a little heavy. hutehe.

to receive or request a half tobacco leaf split along the central vein. pee nahe repokosipei.

to receive or request a half tobacco leaf split along the central vein. repokosipei.

our faces will become white when we come here. yamaki puhiki auhou ta kuikiyo ke.

let them (the hekura) come who put bird feathers in the lobe of their ears. pe no koikoimipi hena huuhou ta kuikiyo.

to come, to advance towards. kuikiyo.

the pulp of those cambures is too hard. hei tate pe re kui pe shãhe amatopi.

fruit whose pulp is abnormally compact or hard. amatopi.

we will make love, you said. pemaki ta kuwemo.

to make love (perfective form). kuwemorayou.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

to scratch someone with an arrow, causing a superficial wound. yaherei.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to disembark, to get out of a canoe or water. washiri.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to have fallen seriously ill (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb . parohorayou.

he killed a tapir, cut it into pieces and they carried it. shama a fa niyapraruruni, a fa pasherarini a yeﬁmahe.

to put oneself to do something. eprai.

to let a fruit become wrinkled (through negligence). wãpret.

to become hard, to deform due to heat. torekou.

to have a numb limb, to start feeling a tingling sensation. pote-.

arrow with a harpoon point. ãtãri ãhi hetho.

to have the thighs separated, to separate them. yorao.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to gather, to pile up, to accumulate. oshoshoprou.

unroll your fishing line, and catch the fish there. wa ãsitha ha kushereni, kihi waho ki re titirati, ki ta shaire.

cord, thread, fishing line. shaire.

amontonen las hojas, ¡nosotros las esparciremos de nuevo. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, spread out, extend. patherio.

to dirty a place, make it repugnant. no kiriamai.

if I receive an old cotton hammock in exchange, I lose. yii pe hote ha ya no peprarou.

to be at a disadvantage, to lose (in an exchange). peprarou.

I approached the place where the gallineta was singing. hãshimo ya wã ahetemakema.

I approached the place where the gallineta was singing. ahetemakema.

in this place I used to eat hoshohã grains. heha hoshohã ya moku wai kuperei.

a short or small edible fruit of a palm tree. hoshohã.

peshi himou: to proclaim one's desire to make love. peshi himou: proclamar su deseo de hacer el amor.

desire. peshi.

to be without fire (person, meat being smoked), to sleep without fire. ruwemorã-.

we quickly split the firewood and they put the váquiros to cook. yetu koã yama ãsho ha pathothokuni, ware pe hariaihe.

he caught a small rahara monster, grabbed it, and then offered it to the Yanomami (as a pet animal). rahara ke ki horoi huwerema, keki ha yukuni yãnomãmi pe rii ha keki hipea shoapeheroma (mit.

perfective suffix indicating completed action. pathothokuni.

I was observing them attentively. ya the miã totihiaprarema.

eye. miã.

tense the upper part of the bow for a moment. ora the hi hami the ta iyopraa.

to tense, to make rigid or firm. yopraa.

I have left doing it for a long time. yetu ha ya huheprariyoma.

I have abandoned/left it definitively. huheprariyoma.

to walk rapidly for some time, to start walking rapidly. ropatou.

those big-mouthed fish that move shaking their tails, I will fish them and give them to the Waika to eat. hei nape mãrohã ki re yaraape, ya ha yokeprarini, waika riha ya e wamai ta yaio.

shake the tail (of fish that move). yaraape.

to become iridescent, shimmering. tererãi.

to stop stinging/biting. noshi imããi.

the woman responds easily to men's advances. suwe a noshi ihite.

to become a bad shooter (after having been skilled in the past). simaprou.

to stop, to cease. ima.

two tails. horohopi shinakipi.

two tails. shinakipi.

nunca hay que matar a las mujeres. kurahe suwe pe poko hupaimi totihiwe.

to kill someone. hupaimi.

to receive a medium or rather large object. prowehepei.

the ancestors (who were to become animals) painted their bodies with blood. yarori ke peni pei ke iye pe wãri hami pe yãmoma.

the people of the beasts, the animals (that had human form in primordial times). yarori.

to cut several pieces to give away. pakekeakei.

Rabipelado was crushed under the rock and the macaw people rolled over his shattered remains on the ground to paint themselves. nãroriwe pei ke makini a nahihoma, a nahihiwe yapikope hami arari pe tihirumoma.

crushed, shattered, crumbled, smashed under a weight. nahihoma.

He could not pass due to a tree being across, to tremble naturally, to tremble for a long time (paludismo, senilidad). temcamo no pudo pasar debido un árbol atravesablar naturalmente, temblar mucho tiempo (pado.

to tremble naturally, to tremble for a long time. prisiprisiwe.

basket full of these ashes. korori ushi pe thari.

the hekura that transmigrates, the hekura that leaves the body of a dead shaman to join another living one, bringing it within reach by means of a stick. haprapi hekura que transmigra, hekura que abandona el ra del alcance de la mano, acercándolo con el cuerpo de un chamán muerto para unirse a otro pie o con un palo.

The Yanomami quickly enlarge the area of a garden clearing by well spreading the embers and ashes. hãnomãmi ke the pe yahipi niya ha taepoheni haprarãretai.

to recover an object for someone else. kurãrekei.

1. To have come off completely (skin of a smoked fish) 2. To have goosebumps. proprokowe.

to go to the ground several times (due to a load). tihohamai.

to be hospitable, welcoming (habitually), to say the right thing to make people feel good. hatukewe.

Murciélago fue a agarrarse de un algarrobo muy alto. ãro kohi yashokootayope ha heweriwe ke a wãri re sutiketayonowei.

high, elevated. yashokowe.

to be hungry, to have an empty stomach. shoetewe.

to grab (a person once) with all one. huweherei.

I slipped on the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

to slide, to slip, to precipitate down a slope. kahe.

Pájaro váquiro acortó camino yéndose directo a través de la selva. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

to take a shortcut through the jungle for a moment. tiheritou.

to be completely rolled up in a spiral; to be folded over itself several times. yapurerayou.

if only I could savor the broth of the stew. ya the pouku wãri ha totihiararini.

they felt good having slept during the night, and it was because they had already dreamed. titi ha pe ha mioni the pe totihorayoma, pe the pe maharimou waikioma ke yaro.

to experience pleasure, to experience a pleasant physical sensation, to enjoy, to savor, to feel good. totihai.

to divide into several groups. shetekerariyo.

to clean one. yãhãheo.

they already went hunting. pe wãri rãmi hua waikirayou ke a kuhe.

already. waikirayou.

to ingest a liquid medicine, to swallow one or two pills drinking water to make them go down. fmetisina koai (neol.

to drink, to ingest. weiki.

to be. aru.

I was moving hesitantly. kekou kuaaherima.

to hesitate, to vacillate (once). wekekeai.

eres tú quien los ha forzado a caminar ligero, es por tu causa que ellos andan tan rápidamente. kaheni ke wa pe wãri hore ha hushushuponi, wa pe kãi wãri hore ropaai ma re kui.

obligar a caminar rápido. hushushupou.

(no clear translation provided). nahitha.

I took the bow without the bowstring and walked leaning on it. hãto mãroko ya nahi re tereiwei, ya paihou kuaaherima.

to lean on a stick or bow while walking. paihirayou.

to slap (oneself or someone else) once. pairei.

to shoot arrows one after another. thehimotaai.

to do evil things, to practice witchcraft. fwãritiwe.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are crowded together there, pressing tightly against each other. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

to crowd together, to press tightly against each other. nakoari.

To place oneself in the middle, in the center. thariai.

his younger brother. kihi kawei.

younger relative of the same sex. kawei-.

white down. horoi.

he approached them, he came near them, and they were afraid of him, and they fled. a ha tikukutoni, a ha hamorioni, the pe horiã ha hititirarini, the pe hoketamama (mit.

to approach, to come near. hamorioni.

to squeeze a milky fruit between the hands to soften it and suck its pulp. hihathoEn.

to be or to exist (in the present tense). kure.

arch yourself. a mi ta yãpreketaru.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãpreke.

follow closely, approach. prakeai.

to put to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. tekerayou.

to go behind, to pass behind. oritaai.

to be decorated with dots or spots (painted circles); to be speckled with spots, mottled. foni tipikiwe.

to decorate with dots or spots (painted circles); to be speckled with spots, mottled. tipiki.

(he) grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to tear off (the end of a long flexible object by pulling). uhetirema.

I'm going to accompany them there. hami ya rii yauo ta shoaoh e ri.

to march slowly (bird of prey). ri.

just when the sun is a little high in the sky is when we become generous. kihi ke mothoka kutou totihio tehe the pe shi ihite waroamai totihio.

to become generous, to have the desire to give. ihitaai.

ant. kapa.

to paint, to dye several objects. frãihimararei.

he placed a well-stocked cluster of pijiguaos on the load that is. wii ke a hami rasha shiko ke ki pata makerema.

to make dense and thick everywhere. shikomai.

to feel a violent pain. prahaimati.

part. parte.

the jaguar arrived where he was and raised his head. ira ke a ha waroikiyoni a mi nonokema.

he raised his head. nonokema.

don't go out. wa hai mai.

you are so afraid that you don't go out. wa kiriri haimi ke.

to exit, to go out, to come out. haimi.

the disease demons devour my flesh (= scrape off my flesh). shawara ke kini yare tire.

to scrape off, to peel off with nails. tire-.

your husband just passed in front of here. paheãrohe ke a hayupariyo kuroi.

to pass in front of. hayupariyo.

they manipulate the kinship terminology. hiki he wãri tatoatarou peo.

manipulate. tatoatarou.

to dig a shallow hole. maketiamai.

mother, it is because the váquiros kept me in the center (of the herd) that my body emanates a pleasant smell. ware ke kini ware ha mi ãmomapoheni ya ni kreteri hai ke a tharei.

kept me in the center (of the herd). ãmomapoheni.

to be passing, distancing oneself. thapi heimai.

to leave something in a place permanently. thapi heipou.

to pass, leave behind, go beyond a certain limit; to leave behind, distance oneself; to leave someone in a place to go to another, abandon on the way. heimai.

to make someone worried or restless. horipramai.

I know what it is. ya the tai.

to know, to be aware of. ihipi.

sobresalir, inflarse, hincharse. tiyeriai.

to lose one. shikopi.

banana shoot. tikaro.

to have beaten someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikirarei.

I provoked the return of the hekura. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

I provoked the return. tatomarema.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

they (two) produced shavings from the ceiba wood, and these turned into many bocón fish and hatate (in a myth). mahe siki re yakekapiiwei mãrohã, hatate pe pruka kuprou shoaoma.

to sharpen, to point (a stick, stakes, a piece of wood). yakekai.

I will show you how to do it (to walk silently). pe mamiki weape.

to teach, instruct, inform. weape.

to have the lymph node in the groin swollen. moshipepiai.

to lose strength for a moment. yautou.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

to destroy, to damage. wãriãi.

to grow (human). tireheprou.

to use the kinship term . suwepikei.

a bright red mark surrounds the bamboo tip. rahaka a iye harukuwe.

to be naturally stained or circularly marked; to encircle, surround something. harukuwe.

they put chili peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

they put chili peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. shoarareiwehei.

tú y yo vamos a vivir juntos. kamiye ke yafeki yaiprariyo.

Ponerse a vivir juntos (parientes que tienen una relación de mashi entre sí). yaiprou.

I already have irritated skin from the heat. ya si fraai re waikipe.

to have irritated skin from being too close to a fire. mamo*.

to pleat (perfective of the inchoative). wãhirayou.

to decorate totally several objects. yãhirirãrei.

his younger brother was (tall) like this. kinaha pe feeshe ke e kuoma.

younger male relative, younger brother. feeshe.

to bend, to curve. toroko.

to have rolled up in a spiral. yapureprou.

bee (unidentified species). suhehetu.

to cause to be damaged, crushed (end of a long object). thekehãmai.

because of tobacco I have lost my strength. naheni ya moyepitariyoma.

to lose one. moyepitariyoma.

to construct a camp or shelter near people already settled. fperia.

almost new or recent. ftutohowe.

the spirits are recognizable with all certainty. no porepi the pe no wai yaipi ha ke.

one could not mistake it for another. the no yaipi mai.

recognizable, unmistakable, indistinguishable. yokapi.

I am hungry. kuwãima henaki.

to be hungry. kuwãima.

a strong stomach ache after a shock or after receiving a blow. yoothoprarei.

went to the bottom. hushomirayou.

one must be content with passing by and glancing at it. uno debe contentarse con pasar y echarle una ojeada.

to glance at it. echarle.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for their house then. kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe.

inhale hallucinogens (perfective). epenamorayou.

(speak of upriver). karaha si kanimana ãﬁ.

speak. karaha.

to allow someone to have a borrowed object for a long time. mahimapou.

to free oneself forcefully from someone's grip: for a young child to forcefully free themselves from their parent's grip before acquiring their double animal (a boy from his father, a girl from her mother). fikãriãi: liberarse animal doble de los niños pequeños, antes de bruscamente de la prensión de otra persona, que estos adquieran el de sus padres (un niño el deshacerse con vigor de una sujeción.

to free oneself forcefully from someone. fikã.

that one who falsely addresses me as a male elder relative, I do not like that at all (because he has not fulfilled his duties as a younger brother to me). hei ware nohi hore re ãimaiwei, ya no wã totihai ma re mai.

to be called a male elder relative by someone else. ãimaiwei.

iliac bone. pehiki.

crunchy. krãrikrãriwe.

they scratched each other (perfective reciprocal). hukekayoray.

the Espíritu-guacamaya tends the ear to listen. arariwe e he re aharape.

to turn one. aharaa.

the otter had curled up at the bottom of a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã waikirayoherima.

to introduce forcefully an elongated object among other elongated objects, to wedge. hikinãi.

to go down (the level of a water stream). terereai.

I said frankly several times that I opposed it. ya wã rea totihia waikia kure, ya wã wawetoaprarou waikia kure.

to say with complete frankness. wawetoaprarou.

to hang in the form of an arc (during the wayamou). tishakoo.

(he) transported a large rock on the shoulder. maa ke ma pata makepoherima.

transported (something) on the shoulder. makepoherima.

the wood is already hollowed out (by insects). hi si hororoprou waikirayoma.

to become hollow, to become full of holes. hororo.

the fish jump out of the water one after another, they jump out of the water. yuri ke ki he ruhupraai, pe ki he ruhou totihio.

to jump out of the water. he ruhu.

to enter into dense vegetation. therayoherii.

acquire a name (name). wahehe.

to put above. yutehekei.

to produce a dry cracking sound (insect crushed with nails). prisimou.

to produce a dry cracking sound. prisimo.

to experience itching all over. fshiki.

the sky darkened gradually. the mi ruweaherii.

the sky darkened gradually. ruweaherii.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into pieces several times to eat it. makosiamai.

to cut or tear a narrow strip of something. makosikei.

to feel very well (physically or mentally). totihitarariyo.

it served no purpose that the mother kept her daughter well seated on the edge of the hammock. pe niini pe thee ke a hore tipemapou re aheteonowei.

it served no purpose. aheteonowei.

he carried plantains hung from a vine on his back. kuratha a rukekano yehipoma.

plantains or bananas hung from a vine. rukekano.

the woman was so afraid that she kept running from one side to the other. suwe ke a kiriri ruaprarou ha tikoikuni.

to run from one side to the other. apraro.

to always be criticizing or scolding. wã pakehe.

they invented a deadly lanceolate point. thapirema.

while he was occupied, he glanced briefly at his son-in-law who raised his head towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

to raise one. nonotia.

to insert a flexible fiber or feather into the nostrils to induce sneezing. hiyokaki hishão.

to insert a twig or feather into an animal's anus and move it back and forth (for amusement). posi hishão.

to insert a long, thin object into an orifice to clean it. hishão.

I am afraid. hapapa si.

to be afraid. hapapa.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small stakes planted around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, dwelling or camp by building a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or stakes planted in the ground). ithorokopou.

(when fishing) fish not biting. imãprou.

he moved away a little in the forest. urihi hami the re payekepayekekeiwei.

to move away a little, to travel a certain distance. ekepayekekei.

you sleep while they make love with your wife. mio hearewe wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe.

to make love. hearewe.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe.

Supernatural beings associated with the glowworm. Amakurithawe.

Anteater was walking with its snout raised upwards (looking for something in the trees). teperiwe ke a hiyoka wãri nonoãpraroma.

to raise the snout/nose upwards, to sniff upwards. nonoãpraroma.

dead cows. ware ke pe.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. hãto yama nahi ha thatathatataani, nimoko ya hako niniprou mai ha.

to feel pain. niniã.

pus. niyoniyo.

the leaves are covered in dew. y ã ã pe hena hemaãhupi.

to be covered in dew. hemaãhupi.

your blood will gush out. iyeiye re ke ki pata ﬁreﬁremou totihia ha.

to bleed profusely. ﬁreﬁremou.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood erect, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

to stand erect, be upright (e.g. rocks). upraha.

he obstructed the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

I block the entrance of the agouti's den. opo ya ka he kahuai.

to close, to obstruct, to block an opening. kahukei.

to work with a buril. tikeke.

(related form). nono.

we (I and they) have filled the baskets with pijiguaos. kamiye yamakini rasha yama pe thariki re thaapotayouwei.

we (I and they) have filled the baskets with pijiguaos. thaapotayouwei.

(a mirror) superficially dirty. opa- umokoyoripi co.

superficially. opa-.

he stopped being angry and that's why he renounced taking revenge. a wã rii ha okeheatarani a puhi rii aithaatarouwei a rii ma re kui.

renounced, gave up. aithaatarouwei.

1. to have a vertigo, dizziness 2. to lose all reference points, get confused, not recognize oneself 3. to regularly have vertigos. mi pe shiwãrihi.

to be afraid. kotorihipe.

tomorrow you will give me a gift. h enaha yare huko sheyeape.

to offer, to give as a gift. weye.

do not believe that the Yanomami will stop blowing on each other. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

to blow on each other. onoope.

they piled up the leaves and then swept the floor. yãã pe henape ha yototoamapotuheni, pitha a hoãremahe.

they swept the floor. yototoamapotuheni.

later hokosiyoma will follow (the other hekura). waiha hokosiyoma a notioyorupe (cha.

will follow later. notioyorupe.

it grows naturally in the savannas, on certain plateaus or in certain mountains. ceba así cuando lo trepé; e naha a ha thani pe nas arbustivas, sobre ciertas mesetas o en ciermishiãki hamai kooma (mit.

savanna. sabana.

to start digging a shallow hole. maketiprai.

to cross in X, to arrange. pakiraai.

to be full of veins/arteries/nerves. mãthoyãhipi.

vein, artery; nerve. mãthoyãhi.

to have a turned eye. mamo henowe.

to have a turned eye. henowe.

to partially surround. hãyokei.

to bend backwards. yapreke.

cross it around my chest (= give me a necklace). weti ipa ke ki ta yakirapari.

to cross two elongated objects, arrange in the shape of a St. Andrew. yakira.

to be short, to be shrunken, to be low and rounded (an object); to be short (a person). fataka.

the edge of the cultivated field, where the new plantings are. hikari theka husho.

edge of the cultivated field. hikari theka husho.

I don't have any more of that. ya horiprou waiki a.

to be lacking something; to run out of something. horiprou.

show, teach. taamai.

embrace the tree tightly with your feet. mamiki ta waporoa ta totihiparu.

embracing the tree trunk with the feet. waporokei.

Drink water. Isi pei.

water. isi.

to form a concavity (surface). hopokoprou.

to become dented, to get dents. wãhihi.

to place leaves on the roof of a shelter to make it waterproof. fhenaki yoai.

to have been trampled, to have left footprints. kãshikirei.

to be softening. fepeh-a-i.

to be in a state or process. -a-i.

the ancestors were already hanging from the posts that support the base of the roof. poreri totahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waikiwe ha.

1. Post that supports the base of the roof at the back of a communal dwelling. 2. Name often given to women (because their hammocks are often installed at the back of the roof).. totahima.

to loosen a little, to slacken, etc.. fprehuhu.

to deform, become hard like leather, twist. ithotho.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco) language. mashipima nahi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). mashipima.

you have made a slip of the tongue. wa aka tihekia re yaipe.

to habitually make mistakes when speaking. tihekiwe.

Murciélago fue a agarrarse de un algarrobo muy alto. ãro kohi yashokootayope ha heweriwe ke a wãri re sutiketayonowei.

to be elevated on something high. yashokootayope.

as Mount Maiyo was gradually submerging under water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma (mit.

to submerge food in water, to cover food completely with water while cooking. he shototopei.

to submerge gradually, to let vegetation invade fields, to submerge food in water. shototo.

what if I insert a twig into its anus and move it back and forth. ya pe posi ta hishãpraa sho.

to insert a thin object into an orifice and move it back and forth. hishãpraa.

to sink, submerge. kohomo.

I am hungry. orakawe ãhi.

to be hungry. orakawe.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

really very sweet. yaiopiwe.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to break, tear, split, separate, divide. kaka.

a white, edible mushroom that grows on rotting wood. iyoyokei.

spirit associated with the Nyctibius bird (a nocturnal bird related to owls and nighthawks). wayahororiwe.

it seems that those who went out to scout have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

it is reserved. the pomiã.

to discover, notice something in the jungle; to be reserved (one realizes it by the specific marks left by the one who discovered it). pomiã.

it seems they crossed (the river) at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami e pe ãhã pekatuatayoma.

the others have already crossed. yetu ai the pe pekatua waikiokei.

upriver and on the other side of the river is where the old fields are located. hei pekaturahari ha, hei re e theka wãri pata no (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to cross a body of water, to cross a river. fpekatu.

we seized a woman in their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to abduct a woman by force. shairarei.

they declared one after the other. thaataramahe.

you waited for me. ware no tapou hea kupiyei.

wait here. a no ta taiku.

he waited for the woman. kama yahi hami suwe ke a no tapoma.

to wait, to expect. tapou.

shake a tobacco leaf to remove the ash when preparing a quid. yomikiprai (sacudir una hoja de tabaco para quitarle la ceniza cuando se prepara una mascada).

shake an object held at the tip of the fingers. yomikiprai.

they have blown on us (with the intention of making us flee). wãri horashikei ma re kuhahei.

to blow repeatedly (durative, plural acts). horashimai.

to fill a container up to the brim. hiekeamai.

low, near the ground. fyahatoto yape.

low, near the ground. fyahatoto.

our relations in the past were friendly and I do not stop thinking that they still are. yaheki rimimayou parioma, yaheki nohimayou tao ya puhi kuuwei ke the.

to be friends, to have good relations with someone habitually. rimimou.

it was at this time that I began to have sexual intercourse (regularly). re tehe ya sirisirimou kutariyoma.

to have sexual intercourse (perfective form). sirisirimorayou.

the knots that tie the vines of my mother-in-law's hammock. yape thooye thoku he ihewe no kiriwe (mit.

mother-in-law. rse.

to become sticky, greasy. sutiai.

to protect oneself by placing a defensive fence. hikoromou.

to protect oneself by placing a defensive fence. hikoro.

to say to each other what one has kept inside (and then reconcile). fposi aumayou, rec.

to say to each other what one has kept inside (and then reconcile). aumayou.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisai.

I will return another day. opi ya huu koope.

later, another time, again, another day. fopi.

to make viscous, to make sticky. oripiamai.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pe re koyokaiwei, ya pe nowã thaa shoarei kurei.

to mix, to put together different objects or substances, to mix different hallucinogens, to mix beads of different colors. koyokoai.

to inform, warn, advise (reciprocal form). yimirãyou.

to bristle (feathers or hair). mãriri.

the celestial beings that put the smoke of the rainbow around their necks. hetu ke misi pe pata wake shi omãyãri re harehei.

celestial beings. hetu.

as Mount Maiyo disappeared little by little under the water, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to disappear gradually or little by little. shototai.

we gathered yagua fruits that we ate. yei yama ki ha hukani yama ki wama.

past declarative. hukani.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to lie down curling the body (animal, dog), to arrange several objects in a circular shape, to arrange leaves around the edge of a basket. wathoai.

ellos se convirtieron en coatíes. yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma (mit.

coatí, zorro guache. yarushe.

the Capuchin monkeys wanted to grab the woman's hand. ho ashiri peni suwe ke a imiki niya ha huweaheni.

to capture, to seize, to grab (a single object). huweaheni.

the nutria had curled up in a place where the top of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to be curled up at the bottom of something. horokope.

they ran in pursuit to the place where the people were gathered. hikari hami praki a hukai mi rereo re shoatariyonowei.

they ran in pursuit. shoatariyonowei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). yereke.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, in order to break or grab. yãmonirei.

they stayed in the house, they spent the whole night in the house. yahi ha e pe komi hiraoma, yahi ha pe komi he haruma.

to stay in a certain place until dawn. harupei.

to trace a line. hetiti.

he does not cease to ruminate his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

to get angry, to lose one. hushuo.

piel de cotinga azul. heimi.

estar en cuclillas con la espalda redondeada. mi kuyuhua.

estar en cuclillas con la espalda redondeada. mi kuyuhu.

(he) urinated on the seeds and then said: "There you go, brother-in-law, I have put them on the ground". mo pe fukeã ha paripraarini: "pei, shori, fei ke ya the pe pakei kuhe".

to urinate (on something, on someone). hukeãi.

to become less rigid, to wrinkle due to the sun (tobacco leaf). yakarokou.

I first caught the fish by shooting them with arrows, then I killed them with a machete. sherekani yuri ya pe tiwehai parioma, siparani ya pe tuyei mahioma.

then, next, later, finally. erekani.

to cause to swell or inflate (something). thorohoamai.

los retoños de plátano son pequeños. kuratha sipe oshe.

brote nuevo, planta sembrada desde hace poco tiempo. puberula.

when the cassava is ready to harvest, come down from the mountain (to eat them with us). nashi siki eteoprou tehe eyemi a mi ta wereparu.

when the cassava/yuca is ready to harvest (plural object). eteoprou.

to perforate, to make holes, to open an orifice in a hollow trunk, to open a package with fingers (perfective, plural of acts). horoshoakei.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another group. pashiki.

where he had spit out tobacco juice mixed with saliva while walking, tobacco plants sprouted. the pe shuu kreshaheripe hami pee nahe kushuu huprariyoma.

flowers that fall from a tree in the process of flowering. shuu.

baskets full of momo fruits. n cestas llenas de frutos momo.

baskets. cestas.

Hunger has already made us miserable. pemaki ohiri no preaprarou re waikiohe e.

to be miserable, to be wretched. waikiohe.

to break the kidneys with the teeth (animal). wahekiprai.

heel. mamiki teshina.

heel. teshina.

I stirred the cambur compote repeatedly. tate ya uku yakoretaama.

to stir or revolve repeatedly. yakoretaama.

to gather, to assemble. irikiprou.

bundle arranged in that way. he ãtetã no.

bundle arranged in that way to be roasted over the coals. ãtetã.

colic makes (one) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. turekou.

when they were doing that, they dropped (the basket), and it transformed into a rahara monster. thamapii tehe, a ha huhepirini rahara ki pata kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to drop something. huhepirini.

abscesses or boils. yuupirayou.

eye. ojo.

you and I are going to live together. kamiye ke yafeki yaiprariyo.

1. To live together (for relatives who have a mashi relationship). 2. To get lost.. yairu.

to split, crack, break at the edge due to a blow (spherical object). tihathoai.

for free, without compensation, or gratuitously. nomai.

to turn away one's gaze. miã hã rakiprou.

to turn away one. rakipro.

activities. actividades.

to have a red and very painful eye (due to the reasons mentioned earlier). kamakaripiprou.

to make a hole in the ground. shirãkorãthawe.

to become beautiful. koshãpiai.

to have been divided into many parts, for offering. hakokorarei.

to begin to choose. yaiprai.

are you able to see the movement of the coughing demon. thokoriwe wama a huu taprai.

supernatural being associated with coughing. thokoriwe.

in this point the water is not deep (in the south of the Orinoco). iha the pe henasio totihio tharei.

to be thin, shallow, or not thick. henasio.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to crush, grind, soften with the hand. hushikãi.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

thin palm wood arrow with the tip hardened in the fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. tiheherari.

as they climbed a steep rock, Kasimi felt dizzy. pei maki ha pe ha yãmothoni, kasimi a shi kirihoma.

a young girl. kasimi.

knife fish. Gymnotus.

to let the meat start to rot (through negligence). thopokopiprou.

to have been affected by the supernatural malefic associated with the vampire and attributed to leishmaniasis. washearei.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or peach palms so that they ripen). yaroromakei.

to have mixed or joined (with people from different communities). nikererayou.

to be transido with cold. kohipii.

to be generous. noshi ihita.

en cada ocasión, él hacía como que iba a subir, pero (en seguida) renunciaba. the wãri tuo kuyeapraroma.

to give up, renounce. -praai.

to call someone by making a sucking noise with the tongue. teketekemo.

we arrived at a place where a flat rock surface protruded from the ground, precisely at the moment when the enemies (lit. pei masi prapariyope ha, yaro re pe katitou totihioimape ha, yamaki kupariyo kurei.

flat rock surface. totihioimape.

brother-in-law, you have traveled a long distance (to arrive here). kuyão, wa nohi prahakeherayoma.

you have traveled a long distance (to arrive here). prahakeherayoma.

this has the smell of a capuchin monkey. the ni kurisipisini.

to have a characteristic smell/odor. pisini.

on the ground. fmashitha hami.

place where a dead person was burned (lit: cooked earth). fmashitha ripi.

earth, ground, soil. fmashitha.

fruits of the wãrãko tree, edible and appearing in large clusters during the dry season, resembling large grapes and velvety. wãrãko ã.

a type of tree; Pourouma sp. (Cecropiaceae). wãrãko.

to tear or rip lengthwise (durative aspect). sherirou.

to give someone an object received from another person. piyemai.

to argue. hira.

(he) went to hunt animals to eat. naiki wãri thaope ha wãikoyã ke kini wa wãri ta shepa.

to hunt. shepa-.

to flap wings without flying (a bird). yathet.

to soften. hou.

we arrived at the place where they habitually come to hunt. the pe re heniomopraaiwehei ha yamaki warokema.

the place where they habitually come to hunt. heniomopraaiwehei.

truth. peheti.

the vulture glides. watupa a reraai.

to plan, to glide, to throw an object so that it glides. remanio.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

blow. golpe.

to speak with a trembling voice. rahihiwe.

yo comprobé que el hielo realmente podía curar and also it can be The word 'tharei' in Yanomami means 'whole'. preyura ke peni pe the haromai totihio tharei.

this roll of fishing line is well filled. ei matiriawe pe pe pata shiko tharei.

they are not seen. pe the mãyo tapraimi ke a tharei.

really. tharei.

to make someone kill. shemai.

to begin to rub against, smear, stain, dirty by rubbing with the hand or a pointed object. hãhiprai.

to limp, to hobble. kayehou.

arrow with a harpoon point. fãtãri ãhi pehitho.

arrow with a harpoon point. fãtãri.

I am in disagreement, you see that I do not approve and I remain silent. ya puhi reatarou ha totihioni, "awei", ya kuu mai re ya kua totihipei ma re kuhe.

I do not approve and remain silent. totihipei.

to shiver; to tremble with fever; to have convulsions. huu.

to beautify, make beautiful (by feeding well). riyehemai.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal or plant). prushiima.

they hurried to defecate and return. yetu the pe shi ha keyeikuni, yetu re the pe ukua kokei.

to defecate, to go to war. keyeikuni.

to walk/go quickly. rohice.

tree. karapa.

to be dazzled. mamo shi kirihou.

to be dazzled, to be under the effect of dazzlement. kirihi.

put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke a ta hiimahe.

put tips on arrows. hiimahe.

he quickly placed a dart in the blowgun that he shot at the end of Titiri's wing. yeture e masi ha titipraparini, titiri pei yoohoapiki hami the horakema.

to place an object in a container or cavity. titiai.

listen well. yimika ta hoyãpari.

listen carefully. hoyãpari.

to be burned, to suffer a heat stroke. frãnãpi.

The woman became sterile due to the effect of manaka plant. Mujer manakapiarayou por efecto de manaka ke ki.

to become sterile. manakapiai.

a creaking sound was heard when the earth began to split (lit. mashitha a hapa hetii tehe the krimou shoarayoma.

to creak. krimou.

I'm going to establish my conuco upriver. ora ha ke ya rii hikarimorãyou.

to establish a conuco (agricultural plot) upriver. hikarimorãyou.

to cut the poles for the roof of a collective dwelling or shelter; to construct a temporary shelter, to construct a collective dwelling. hãto nahimou.

we constructed the forest shelters by the water. yamaki hãto nahimou re kupariyowei.

to cut, to construct. nahimou.

to hang at a low height and become distended. tirorai.

inaccessible den (it gets lost under rocks or thick roots). shi wãripraai.

to flatten, to make flat. makeheai.

to snort (once). rekukuãi.

I decorated the bamboo tip with various geometric motifs. rahaka ya mi onimai.

to paint geometric motifs on someone. oniãi.

they were already hanging by their arms, the ancestors had turned into sloths. the pe yakukuprawe waikiwe ha, poreri ke the ihamarariyoma.

to hang or be hanging by the arms; to be hanging by arms and legs with the head down (like sloths), to hang with all one. yakukuai.

they did not manage to easily lift the large rock. no lograron levantar fácilmente la gran roca.

to lift. levantar.

to build shelters near a collective house. sipomou.

to dream incessantly. maharimou yashushou.

to dream incessantly. yashushou.

we went away running. yamaki rereai kuaaherima.

let's run away, older brother. ãiwe, peheki ta rereheri.

(were heard) the cries of the ancestor running through the central plaza of the house. poreri pe miã kãi rerepeherima, yahi hami (mit.

to run through the house or central plaza. rerepei.

to be occupied, to have the will to work. ohetrabajar.

to surpass someone from both the right and left at the same time. yakaromarei.

to soften several objects. fepeha.

to have white spots on the body. yoapiai.

to have white spots on the body, probably caused by a fungal infection. yoapiai.

beautiful, splendid. pernoshi.

to paint oneself on the face. hiporoshio.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved, whose opening is twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

curved, twisted. tapariyo.

he quickly finished making the club. himo the kãi hirikia ropaa re yairarenowei.

to do something quickly. yairarenowei.

I see the forest. Uu koshi pei.

belongs to the taxonomic system of animals. koshi.

to have a fever. wakehe.

to start piling up tobacco leaves one on top of the other and making balls to keep them dry. ithoriprai.

to help her. payeri.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks (plural subject). hãikãmou.

when one possesses arrows, like us, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

we collected canes to make arrows. shereka yama he pe teararema.

arrow, shaft of an arrow. shereka.

become numb. harihi.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me greatly. he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

to have been filled or to have been filled to the brim. rahoa.

to reduce, diminish, become smaller, melt, become thinner. kuwetaprou.

to close a burrow by burying tightly aligned sticks. hikiniprai.

to pass ahead. hayu-ai.

to become ripe, changing color (fruit). shoporayou.

to separate the toes with the hand. mamiki kakatai.

to tear incompletely, to tear at the edge. kakamawe.

to have oneself painted (with lines crossing the face). hu hahetimou.

to have oneself painted with lines crossing the face obliquely and intersecting on the nose. hahetimou.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness; to lose all point of reference, to get confused, to not recognize oneself. shiwãrihiãi.

They looked for them, but since there were no marks of their steps, they stopped. the pe taeo ma kui, the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

to have a footprint (the ground). yãshiki.

don't be afraid. kirihotihehe.

don. kirihotihehe.

as the day never ended, they ended up getting tired. the mi haru mraimi ha yãkumi the pe motaai totihioma (mit.

to be always tired. motaoprou.

not to close the eyes all night. mamo he wakarai.

to remain awake all night, to stay up all night. wakara.

the earth wall that blocks the burrow of the waraima lizard. waraima akatho heporashi.

a type of lizard that lives in underground cavities. waraima.

to separate the buttocks. horihi.

hunter who participates in. henimomi.

they killed the person whose son lives in another community. ihi re ihirupi hoã wãri perihou ma re kui pe wãri sherema ha tharahei.

to live in another place, to live in another community. fperio.

to melt, reduce, diminish, become thin. kuwetaai.

other children gathered with the first ones. ai ihiru pe warokema.

I arrived when he was gravely ill. a hariri prao totihio tehe ya warokema.

we arrived at the site where they usually come for long hunting trips. pe wãri re heniyomopraaiwei ha yamaki warokema.

to arrive at a place, to reach, to gather with. warokema.

many paujíes flew away, they were not shy at all. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma, mohoti totih i w e.

to fly away (from the ground). yeoprou.

the child is full from the breast. fihiru a hiekea.

the tree was like that when I climbed it. e naha hi kuo tehe ya tupei ma kuroi.

to fill up to the brim. hiekea.

to cover or mix with sand, to put sand in food carelessly. mrakatahupiamai.

to inform, to tell someone where something is located. yimira.

as the tapir perceives the reflection of the hunters surrounding it, it starts to walk. yãnomãmi the pe manashi he hãyowe ha shama a pata terekekeherayou.

reflection. hãyowe.

to swirl, make whirlpools (water). horahoramou.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just gone through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

to constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole). ayaprayoararomi.

to make a deep cut in a tree. shoeke.

the tintura de caruto will not take effect. tana a no no keopimi.

to be convinced that something will not happen. keopimi.

1. To fragment a bone by splitting it with a knife or machete, to make harpoon arrowheads. 2. To forcefully blow a dose of hallucinogen into someone. tikaroa.

we regrouped and threw ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to fall or slide into water, to dive, to throw oneself down a slope. nihoropariyo.

if you sleep without fire you will get elephantiasis in the testicles. wa ruwemou tehe wa natheki wakapirayou.

elephantiasis in the testicles. ruwemou.

the ones who live upriver returned there. ora hami the pe te kui the pe koo koreherayou.

the ones who live upriver returned there. koreherayou.

we slept during the night and then descended from the mountain (upon waking in the morning). yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descend by a slope. haruawei.

vayan allí (ustedes dos) a preparar una mezcla de fruto del seje con agua. hoko upe ta yarupikutu.

ve a llevar al niño junto a (su madre), tiene miedo. ihiru a ta komakutu, a kirii.

away, at a distance. -tayo.

to make an edible (non-bitter) poisonous fruit by cooking it for a long time or soaking it in running water. mihitamai.

he did not take long to approach the place (walking quickly). yetu ke the urihi ahetetaremam a h e.

to approach quickly (by walking). ahetetarefriar.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to splash each other, to play splashing mutually. hamishayou.

she had put thoru flowers in her earlobes, and she looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

put a blue cotinga skin in my earlobe (= give me a blue cotinga skin). heimi siki ta huupari.

to put something in the earlobe (a stick, feathers, flowers, etc.). huukei.

to harden. monono.

to be trading partners. thapoyou.

we have fun. pemaki iriamou.

I look at you (plural). pemaki mii.

we (inclusive, subject). pemaki.

to take or obtain something directly, without going through any intermediary. sharirirei.

to sweep the floor. hãrãru.

to tell someone to bend their head to receive a blow from an adversary. sheamai.

the cambures (fruits) are crushed under the weight. tate ke ki nahihou.

to crush, to crumble, to break into pieces. ihip.

there is little honey, and the nests are trapped in the forks of the trees. pei u pe wai hãkikiwe.

that small thing that is carried wedged between the loincloth and the skin (a knife), I have brought this bow to trade it. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei.

to be stuck, wedged, or trapped. hãkikou.

put something at the bottom. hushomikei.

when one possesses arrows, as we do, one is also in a condition to kill (for revenge). e naha shereka re pe pomou mi ha hetuoni the pe mishiã rii thamapou mi fetuo ma re kui.

to be in a condition to kill (someone). hetuoni.

he inhales hallucinogenic (holding it in the palm of his hand) and strikes his no uhutipi. epena wa re ukukuãrãreiwei, a no uhutipi wãri ta sheri.

to inhale or aspirate repeatedly. ukukuãrãrei.

weeds, vegetation that regrows on cleared or burned land. kaukau.

the sipara tree was not big, it had a liana wrapped around it. sipara kuwetawe kohi wai kuoma ma kui, hei kohi pe ha thoo thotho yãyokooma.

to roll up, to wrap around. yãyoko.

to feel quite well (physically or mentally); to rejoice. totihitatou.

you must inform me correctly, brother-in-law, that is my opinion. ware nowã ta thaa ta shaririparini, shori ya puhi kurani ha (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to do/say correctly. shariri.

I used to dock at a place where the vegetation was sparse. u nokare wawepohori ha ya katioma.

place where vegetation is sparse. wawepohori.

the flood waters were approaching, and the ground was crumbling. yetu motu ke u ha ahetoimani, pitha a hishishai re kuaaimaiwei.

underground water expanse. motu.

one cannot smoke this cigarette (it is too tight). sikariyo the ukukuproimi.

to be tired, fatigued. puhi wãrihiwe.

to be unable to do (something). prou.

he called the others who butchered the animal. ai pe ha pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni.

calling/summoning others. pokomireni.

to bend the arm (when one was in another position). tishokotou.

to harass. wetiai.

daughter, hurry to go with your husband to gather my pijiguaos. oãsi, heãrohe sho rashaye ke ki ta yeapi.

I would also have gone to visit, but unfortunately I was prohibited (lit: I would also have gone to see the house). kamiye sho yahe a yahi mori mii ma kui, yare a wasia tikokei.

with, in company of, also, equally. yeapi.

the serpent disappeared (at the edge of the water). oru keki nohi mohotupariyo kuhe.

disappeared. mohotupariyo.

he pulled the front part of the canoe onto the shore. kanawa ya ora makeai.

he placed the fire on a dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke hi horepi poko shatiope ha wake makekema.

to place on top of something. makeai.

when Siroromi got up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

to squeeze something or someone between the thighs. hututuai.

to draw two lines, to scratch twice (longitudinally). shetitiprai.

not being very big (speaking of game or prey). ãyãhãwemi.

to appear, to form (a light spot on the skin). wahipirayou.

Siroromi desolló al hombre que chillaba en vano de dolor. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to scream in pain. wãyu.

to bear several dents or concave marks in various places. wãhihiwe.

to make spin an object 180 degrees; to invert the ends of a long object. ãhemimai.

pain that amplifies, a significant message that visitors are about to arrive (they trample the ground and thus revive the pain). fnini kashuu.

to feel a violent pain due to a blow received in combat. fnini tihetiprou.

pain, ache. fnini.

the tobacco is becoming moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to become moldy in a place. rohorokei.

did something to take the contents for oneself. oshokorerei.

blow me hallucinogenic drug gently. opi the ta shuriripa.

to blow a dose of hallucinogenic drug to someone (through a long tube). shuririkei.

I will mix the two magic substances. heri ya heshihikei.

I will take a kumi vine, I will add the fragrant bark of the balsam of tolu, and I will use that spell to seduce her. kumi ya rii ha heshiprarini, mãrã ya sihi ha heshiprarini, ya rii kumiãiwe.

to mix two objects or two different substances. heshihiai.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

nuca (back of the neck). femaka.

to squeeze a milky fruit between the hands to soften it and suck its pulp. hihathorei.

I fish in one place, then another. yuri ya pe kããtarai.

to fish in one place, then another. kããtarai.

to split a tobacco leaf in half lengthwise following the central vein, for the purpose of gifting half of it. pee nahe repokosikei.

to split a tobacco leaf in half lengthwise following the central vein, for the purpose of gifting half of it. repokosikei.

it bit me suddenly. pe the ki waweheprakei kurei.

it bit me suddenly. waweheprakei.

I feel like vomiting. ya no suharayopi.

1. To swallow, to devour. 2. To vomit. suhaa.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. hãto yama nahi ha thatathatataani, nimoko vb.

to become painful, to feel pain. niniãi.

the surroundings of the river. paiwa.

to release a person who has been restrained to prevent them from committing acts of violence, once they have calmed down. huhuraprai.

coolness that precedes dawn. wahuru.

you are not going to divide what belongs to me. matohiye wama pe no shererai ma re mai.

to divide, separate into parts. matohiye.

"those are your own burned bones. kahe ke wa ishipe. ", shouted the parrot. werehi a wãri ta no kutarureshini.

calcined bones of a dead person after the cremation of the body; crushed bones during the paushimou ritual. ishipe.

these ripe fruits are truly delicious. the wai wake wãnihitawe yai.

to become good (quality of an object). wãnihitaai.

He is being determined to go. Niyou wake huu.

determined. niyou.

don't put the fishhook in your mouth, because you might swallow it. uhea a hopotihe, wa suharei.

to swallow, to gulp down. suharei.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to have flattened the end (of an elongated object). tataharayou.

to bend, to curve upwards. ekou.

to be totally decorated with crosses. yakirawe.

Rabipelado used the aphrodisiac kumi several times to seduce the two women. nãroriweni suwe ke kipi kumimama.

to use an aphrodisiac to seduce women (multiple times). kumimama.

to make something too short (to be able to join, tie, reach). hawemarei.

to become stiff, to contract (to make an effort). hitatatou.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. ata.

trees. uhiki.

a type of tree in the Caryocaraceae family. ryocar.

to close a basket by passing a loop from one edge to the other over the contents. shi wãrihi.

it took little time for the turtle's (sick) head to suddenly collapse. poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to have open eyes, to be awake; to hang partially in the void; to be in balance, to be about to hang in the void (when sliding); to fall seriously ill. reikei.

I remained awake until dawn complaining. ya rããwã teteo he haruma.

complaining. rããwã.

bend, curve, arch. hitho-.

that breath that had been cut off (the hekura) they restored (= they returned life to the dead). hei mishiãki hematha re kui, mishiãki hapa re horimapohei.

to restore life, to revive. horimapohei.

the jaguar howled in pain and rubbed itself against the trees (to remove the tortoise that was biting its throat). ira ke a rããmorayoma, hii ke hiki hami a hãrikiãprarama.

1. Fry, roast, toast. 2. Rub two objects together.. hãrikiãi.

come here quickly to strike. heyeha the ta tuyepraayo she.

to collect honey (by striking to open the nest). fpuu tuyei.

to strike, to hit. tuyepraayo.

to remain behind for a short time. koroprao.

will what is making that noise be outside. the ã sipoa kurawe.

to be outside. sipoa.

my words will make you dream. ya kahiki ã no thapipi keope.

to make someone dream. keope.

to attack enemy shamans. fhekura shurukai.

it seems they want to attack me at all costs and I'm still waiting for them. ware niya hoã shurukai he yatiprouhe ha ya pe no ma re tapou shoai.

we intend to attack them anyway. yama the pe niya shurukai he ha yatiokirini.

to attack. shurukai.

they will really get tired. wamaki motai totihiope.

when you open our hive (to harvest our honey) you will get tired (we have so much honey). yamareki pashai tehe wamaki motai totihiope (mit.

to be always tired. motaprou.

were hanging. colgaban.

your teeth are so big (that I'm afraid). wa naki pata kuyehewemi.

to induce renunciation or abandonment of something. fkuyehemi.

to shout at someone. rahuprai.

to be hungry. ãmoyori.

son, prepare a strap to carry me. pusi yare natha ta thakiyo.

will they finally prepare that strap for (carrying) the pot. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

bark, rope, strap made of bark. iwaiwa.

they put quickly to dry, roughly, chili peppers on the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke incompletely a game or fish prey; not to dry perfectly. weheroprou.

catch fish. koapra.

to melt, reduce, diminish, become thin. kuwetaai.

to let a fruit become wrinkled (through negligence). wãpret.

to move away a little, to move aside. tikukutou.

mixed, bound. nikerewe.

we dispersed slowly and when we walked in parallel rows, we stopped. yamaki mi opi yoããherima, yamaki mi ha yoikuni, yamaki uprat a r i y o m a.

to spread out, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããheri.

the man went mixed with the winged termites. wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

mixed, intermingled. thaporeri.

to wait for an attack without fear. no tataai.

to wait for an attack without fear. tataai.

above all, do not return to visit with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

to stand up, to stand. yororoo.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to disembark, to get out of a canoe or water. washiria.

to be hungry. ãyukurami.

he traced a curved line (on his forehead) and immediately set out for the shapono. the mi hore ha tikekeikuni yetu the wãri ha ikutaikuni, shapono hami.

to trace several curved lines on someone. tikekeakei.

the noise is barely heard. the hoã manashiwe.

noise, sound, voice. manashiwe.

null. masitha.

to have forcibly inserted an object into too narrow an opening (and gotten it stuck). hokomakei.

to uncover, reveal (that which is hidden or masked); to remove the bark from cotton, to part the hair to look for lice; to turn the pages of a book (neol.). hapresheai.

to get bruised (in one place). si wãoko.

to get bruised (in one place). wãoko.

the stream is sinuous. ushipiri shãkokowe.

to be folded multiple times on itself (object); to be sinuous, to have numerous meanders (streams of water). shãkokowe.

to become narrow, to close (a hole, opening, orifice). hokokei.

when they wanted to join the hekura, they left carrying their hammocks. hekura pe rii hami pe waroo puhio tehe, pe shurukou shoaoma.

to leave, to depart carrying one. shuruku.

to tremble, to shiver. rutarutamou.

(related suffix). -ma-.

very early in the morning she hung the package from the hammock rope of her father (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

she hung the package from the hammock rope of her father (near the fire). pekithapi.

parece que la gente de Shãshãnãwe los hizo cruzar el río en el raudal Karepe. karepe pora hami shãshãnãwe theri pe ãhã pekakuamatayomahe.

a place name. shãshãnãwe.

to get cold. esfriarse.

he rejected me vigorously. ikãri yare hirururema.

hurry to take down your hammocks while I drive away the beast and keep it at a distance. ira ya wãri hirurua payekepou kuo tehe, thoku thaprai ta haiohe.

to reject someone repeatedly with the hands. hirurupraai.

to be skilled in the art of wayamou, to have eloquence. karehou.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small stakes planted around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to start protecting an object, dwelling or camp by building a fence around it (with palm leaves, branches or stakes planted in the ground). ithorokoprai.

in cuanto a la mujer, cuñado, hablaré, diré que se la muestren. hei misikiri hena re kui, tamariyo, shori, kuuwei ke the.

woman (wife, daughter, sister). misikiri.

to fall ill and also it can be The word 'hariri' in Yanomami means 'to harm'. haririai.

to fall ill. hariri.

venomous snake; Bothrops colombiensis (Viperidae). karihirima ke ki.

he buried his nails in the top of the skull. pei re he mono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

top of the skull. eyoshipe.

1. to become fragile or brittle, 2. to be brittle. yeriri.

to become sensitive to the taste of rancid butter or oxidized fats. ãsikeprariyo.

to take out food in the indicated manner; to offer (during a ceremonial dialogue). fni hikei.

to take, to remove. yake.

I covered my eyes. mi kehukei.

to cover one. kehukei.

he/she/it went with the others to the forest. urihi hami a nokarayoher i m a.

he/she/it went with the others. nokarayoher.

to swirl, make whirlpools (water). horahoramou.

line up here. heyeha ke wamaki ha masisoni.

to line up, to align. itou.

he glanced at his son-in-law from time to time because his son-in-law raised his head towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

to raise the head (to look up). nonokei.

to make something sweet. kretetiprai.

do not let anyone give me fishing line, share it only among yourselves. kamiye re riha matiriawe a wetimatihe, kahe wamakini ke ki wetii ta makokahe.

to give as a gift by cutting with the teeth (especially fishing line). wetimatihe.

almost new or recent. ftutohowe.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with plant residues or dry leaves. heshãheshãpiprou.

they penetrated the conuco (crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hay u o m a.

they crossed the morichal (palm grove) and left it behind. eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

to pass, to leave behind, to cross a space from one edge to another. hayuamai.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

completely. totihirayou.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani.

shake (once). ripukuai.

to rub slices. hirikiãi.

to paint round spots on someone or something by applying a ball of coloring moistened with saliva. hikikãmai.

they also transformed into spider monkeys. pasho pe kãi kuprariyoma.

to transform, to change into. koprariyoma.

although they (two) went down, he killed them both anyway. kama ke kipi ithou ma kupe ha ke kipi shea he yatirema.

he killed them both. yatirema.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to crush, grind, soften with the hand. hushikiãi.

They will catch termite soldiers by inserting a twig into their nests, they will eat them. oshe wama akaki ha hishãni pe akaki he oape.

Belongs to the taxonomic system of certain animals (lizards and termites) that live in underground galleries. akaki.

the beads of the necklace that he had broken scattered. tope ke pe huhetima no yapikamama.

necklace of beads that has been intentionally broken. huhetima.

lower eyelid. perimi.

are you all painted and adorned. haiprou maki paushimoã ta haikirihawe.

to be adorned, painted. haiprou.

became fragile. nonirayou.

when I am like this under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after another all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects, at different times; can also connote a frequentative. opro.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and crush your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to crush something by hitting it with a stick. yatikiamai.

to be hot. mokomoko.

to be decorated with semicircles. paroto.

fell one after another (fruits). shithãrayou.

thus it is called yopo and also it can be The word 'así' in Yanomami means 'in this way'. e naha hi ma niopo.

thus, in this way, like this. así.

to be a bad shooter. nimi.

the woman hung herself from a tree and, when Danta passed underneath, she kicked him. hii ke hi kuope ha suwe a ha yautaruni shamariwe ke a pata pepihitou tehe.

to hang or be hung upside down; to dangle. yautaruni.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokem.

the little one was suckling (from his mother's breast). ihiru ke a wai hesi hoturoma.

to suckle (a baby). mamaba.

to be lightly sweetened. kroa.

to leave the end of an object deformed; to roll up, to fold up. wãpretãmai.

Variant emphatic form of asi yai (to exclaim in grief). fasi yai heparo yai.

to exclaim or cry out in grief at the death of a loved one. fasi.

I put the clothes to soak. iro ya siki kãkema.

He soaked the wapu fruits, and much later he asked his mother-in-law if it was time to eat them. wapu a ha kãpãrini, the no tetehetou tehe pe yesi iha e the wãrima.

to soak, to leave soaking. kãkema.

as you can see I am disconcerted and I wonder what to do. ya puhi ma re horihii, weti naha yaiwe ta thawe, ya puhi ma re kuu waikiwe.

not knowing what to do, being disconcerted. horihiwe.

I clearly heard in a dream the song of the raromi birds. raromi konari ke kipi ã mahariri ha topraikukirini.

bird song. konari.

I'm going to the palm grove to make a tapir scream in pain (lit. eteweshi siki hami ya the pata ta hiyohiyomomakiri sho.

to make (an animal) scream in pain. hiyohiyomomakiri.

tense for an instant the upper end of the bow. ora the hi hami the ta iyopraa.

tense the upper end of the bow. iyopraa.

tree (unidentified) on which the yakureto caterpillars feed. yakureto nahi.

generic term applied to various species of edible caterpillars. yakureto.

to face each other in two groups in a game that consists of pulling a vine, each team trying to pull the other in the opposite direction. shaimayorayou.

to laugh until you can. kohipiprou.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they arrived at the summit of the Gallineta mountain. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe (mit.

to arrive at the summit. pororoaihe.

come here to fan the fire. koa wake ta yareyo.

I will kill the cachicamo by putting smoke in its den. opo ya yareprai.

when they find a giant cachicamo, they will suffocate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

to fan the fire. yareyo.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

where (he/she/it) had spit. kesheoheripe.

hard, tough. tiiwe.

I am sure that they are sweet. the ki no kretetio no yaiopiwe.

expresses the speaker. ...piwe.

Do you have your own knife. kahe wa siparapi si kua.

knife. cuchillo.

acquire reflections. frãihi.

to empty. prokotou.

he is happy. moroshi yorurewe.

to be happy. yorurewe.

serous liquid. uweuwe.

I burned myself in a bonfire, and that's how I became big. relakurei (mit.

I burned myself in a bonfire, and that. relakurei.

a nami kiããi shoawe: it would seem that it is still moving (= it would seem that it is still alive). a nami kiããi shoawe: se diría que aún se mueve (= se diría que todavía está vivo).

to move, to stir. ki.

nocturnal curassow; Nothocrax urumutum (Cracidae). katara.

to bend a finger. fi mihena shãkoãi.

to bend a finger. shãkoã.

to exchange reciprocally (the same object, at the same moment). nomihãyou.

to go without ceasing from one side to the other. huoprou.

he is happy. omaoma ãsihi.

to be happy. omaoma.

the humans desire to illuminate it. mayepi pe komi ha toreroimani.

they desire to illuminate it. toreroimani.

to emerge, come out. ure.

to be open, separated. watetewe.

(it) belongs to the taxonomy of animals. kopetei mashi.

animal. kopetei.

teach (songs), distract, hinder the proper development of something, bother, obstruct. yapekai.

plant vine cultivated. shokopi.

(perfective form of kapeai) found by searching with the foot, plural object. kaperarei.

eat, blind (person). hupewe, a ta iya.

blind (person). hupewe.

(he) has hair that is too long. he potoshii.

to have hair that is too long, to the point that it covers the nape. potoshii.

en ese lugar viviré, en ese lugar haré un círculo al caminar. ya ãhiki ka thai ha kuparuni, ya motoreo ta yaio.

1. Secador de droga o troja en forma de anillo, hecho o bien con una varita ﬂexible plegada para conformar un círculo, o bien con un bejuco grueso enrollado sobre sí mismo; un entretejido de bejucos ocupa el centro, mantiene la forma de la estructura y le sirve de soporte a lo que se pone a secar. 2. Objeto que los hekura hacen dar vueltas (como una honda).. motorema.

to be naturally unstable or wobbly. kapuruwe.

he inhales hallucinogenic (holding it in the palm of his hand) and strikes his no uhutipi. epena wa re ukukuãrãreiwei, a no uhutipi wãri ta sheri.

to inhale or aspirate repeatedly. ukukuãrãrei.

don't think that we don't know how to take hallucinogens (= don't think we are bad shamans). epena yama a koai toproimi pewe tao, pe puhi kutihe.

not to be able to do it, not to achieve it. toproimi.

to stay for a moment in the center. thariprao.

to begin to paint a motif composed of two crossed lines on someone. yãhiriprai.

green ibis (bird species). corocoro.

oh you, demon of the earth, stop proclaiming your cannibal appetite, make me crunch between your teeth. tito caníbal.

demon. tito.

they had divided into two parallel rows. yakekeen.

to divide into two parallel rows. yakekeen.

tadpole. shãfo.

they took the one who lived in this hearth. hei ke yãnopi re kui, a pararureherii kuhe.

the flood water came pushing the Waika. motu ke u hai ha kuikuni, waika ke pe pararumai ha kuikuni.

to lead someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child); to make someone walk in front of oneself; to push something in front of oneself (e.g. fishing baskets). pararumai.

to brush past, to go and place oneself or be stuck to someone. pakio.

on the slope of that mountain, there where they hang from the trees, I will cut those lianas. fei pariki re uprayaﬁ, fei thoo thoku re tuyahi, ya thoku ta pafetipra.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will say that for sure (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

to be located facing, and at a certain distance (variable), from the place of the utterance. tuyahi.

to clear. noshi takaka.

to become rough, rough; to smoke, to become rigid and dry by means of heat (fire, sun). ropakei.

in all the points of the trees against which he had rubbed his bloodied penis, transverse stains were seen. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to rub against, to clean, to wipe, to erase by rubbing with the hand or with a pointed object; to dirty or stain an object by rubbing or applying another. hãhii.

we had been stopped for a long time when the noise was heard. yamaki uprahatio tehe yetu the ã petariyo kurei.

for a long time. uprahatio.

(no clear translation). rohotho.

to repeat 'asi yai' several times in succession. asiprao.

fruit of the hemare mohi tree; its sugary pulp is eaten directly, the seeds are eaten after cooking in water or over the embers. yerekerimi.

to salt (perfective form). mositimarei.

light red (or faded). puﬁ rumahawe.

pale or light-colored. rumahawe.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, really making me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

made (someone) stagger. atatemarei.

se dice que el anciano de Horeape, ése que tiene la piel picada (de puntos negros), quiere venir a lanzarme (lit. horeape theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

a place name. Horeape.

go there to hunt váquiros. ware ke ki ta niyapraharu.

to hunt. praharayo.

ha. he. ha. he.

laughter. hehehe.

I am dying. no kuwemi.

to be dying, moribund. kuwemi.

to have cooked in water, cooked in water (perfective). hariarei.

a type of bird, Galbula sp. (Galbulidae) (lit.: sound signal of the snake waro, mapanare). ayupuhurami.

to be rigid under the effect of an effort. hirarao.

to crack. hãthothoãi.

on the face of the old woman they painted lines that started from the edge of the eyes. suwe ke the pata mamo kasi wãri oniprai ha yairoheni.

eyelid; edge of the eyes. fpe.

no. kahiti.

she woke up and left him (where he was). the wãri hoketariyowei, the wãri takeherii.

the child did not go down and he abandoned him. ihiru a ithonomi, a takeherima (mit.

to abandon someone on the way. ftakeherii.

to wrinkle. arrugarse.

tu no te dices: "con este chinchorro de algodón obtendré bienes manufacturados"; (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. ke ki ha napeyoma ya ipiawe.

ceremonial. ipiawe.

but it has been a long time since I ate fruits. yama pe ya ki nohi warei kurei.

to sit in the water with legs spread apart. tiemwãri.

supernatural bees, hekura bees. oi hoari naki.

supernatural bees, hekura bees. hoari.

to make war, to fight. rahakapi.

I hurry to go get my bark hammock. yãriye ya natha siki nape kãi wãri re yekeiwei.

hammock made of yãri natha bark. yãriye.

again the woman described a curve then. suwe e naha ke a tihiyea kuprou ha koroni.

then. koroni.

they gathered to bathe, and when all were painted and adorned with their feathers, they set out for the house of the hekura. pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma, pe yãmoã hititia ha totihirini hekura pe yahipi ha pe hurayoma.

when all were painted and adorned with feathers. totihirini.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

the woman, who was coming out of isolation after her first period, walked slowly. suwe a shuhuhuru huu prihãtou hooma.

very, much. hooma.

to soften a vine or bark by twisting it. yaproteai.

I was frightened and startled. the auprariyoma.

to enlarge, to extend, to widen. praukuprariyo.

when I was young I used to offer many objects (= I was generous) and also it can be The word 'matohi' in Yanomami means 'belongings of a deceased person'. matohi ya ki wãri hipei totihioma.

in the stomach the ashes of the dead swell up (after ingesting them in a banana compote during a funeral ceremony). pei pusi hami matohi the pe huruu totih i w e: en el estómago las cenizas de los muertos se hinchan (luego de ingerirlas en una compota de plátano durante una ceremonia funeraria).

when I was young. matohi.

to free oneself abruptly from someone. hapara.

bow that lacks rigidity. fhãto nahi prehepi.

soft (certain substances, certain fruits). prehepi.

go get water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

I scoop out the banana compote that is in the pot with a gourd. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

to receive something that has been extracted using a utensil (gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikepei.

curved: path that describes a circle curve. tihiyewe: camino que describe una curva de círculo.

curved. tihiyewe.

I got stuck by a deep river. mãu u oki ha ya shi wãrioma.

I left my arrow there where I couldn't go get it (in a tree where the speaker couldn't go get it). shereka ya shi wãrimakema.

to be blocked, to be stuck. wãrikei.

qué mandón es ése. kurahe the wai ta nosiyemou piyeapraowe.

expresses astonishment. nosiyemou.

to split. kaheki.

(habla de río arriba. the wamou ure- uruﬁ.

water, liquid. ure-.

edible fruit of the shãpre uhi tree. shãpu.

bamboo shaving. rahaka akaweshi.

Translation:. mayepi akaweshi.

shaving, chip. akaweshi.

to happen rapidly in succession. notinotimou.

it is nothing other than a pelt of a zorro guache (a type of fox), however its head (its upper extremity) has a pretty notch. yarushe pei si ma kui wa si he pata yakatowe ta toprapariyohani.

round object whose upper part has a more or less concave incision (a groove, a notch) that divides it into two more or less equal and regular areas. yakatowe.

he hid out of fear of the dangerous thing. kirikiri pe wayu ha a hitheoma.

dangerous, potent hallucinogen. kirikiri.

to become dusty, to get covered in dust. hekãhekãpiprou.

(negative prefix). heo.

se me va a tapar la nariz (al tomar el alucinógeno). chinkomãpariyo.

to make the noise that a taut string makes when vibrating. pãopãomo.

with circular movements (such as peeling an apple with a knife). shokekekei.

there is honey (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

there is honey (I discovered it some time ago). kupohorurei.

fyãno ithãã: to be, to exist (a dwelling, a temporary shelter). fyãno ithãã: ser, existir (una vivienda, un refugio provisional).

to exist. existir.

dispárenle flechas, que se muera. yama a wãri si hetimarema ke, a wãri ta mataru.

to kill by wounding, to kill with a weapon (lit.: to split the skin). hetimarema.

Why are they inviting me. ware nakapou ma ta sihewe.

dubitative modality. hewe.

we arrived at the place where they usually come for long hunting trips. pe wãri re heniyomopraaiwei ha yamaki warokema.

where they go for long hunting trips. heniyomopraaiwei.

Who is at the foot of Mount Morãmana over there. hei morãmana ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi ke ki kothe ha, weti ke a wãri roa.

a mountain or hill. morãmana.

indicates a more or less distant past, but which is always situated within the course of the day. ku-roi.

while Jaguar lay on the ground with labored breathing, they (two) went back down (from the tree). irariwe ke a hethekou mao tehe, a wãri prao tehe, ke kipi hithoa ha koruni.

to breathe with difficulty (when sick, severely injured or dying). hithoa.

the fire extinguished immediately. koa wake misi ruprou shoarayoma.

to extinguish (a fire). ruprou.

fur of an animal. kirishãripi.

a mythological figure who stole fire and is the owner of fire. simConoto.

2. 2. To accompany someone back. Acompañar de regreso a alguien.

to accompany. acompañar.

when he arrived at the river bank he sat for a moment. pei u kasi hami a waroo tehe a wãri rotapariyoma.

sat for a moment. rotapariyoma.

to leave something to become curved (perfective form). parokomarei.

accumulated. tikarayou.

to amplify (noise, voice). nakemai.

to fall asleep when night ends. fmio henao.

when I sleep deeply I lose all consciousness. ya mio he thareo tehe ya mohotua ma totihire re.

to sleep, to fall asleep. fmio.

to stumble, to falter (due to the effect of a load). tihoprakei.

to flap wings without flying (a bird). yathet.

I am hungry. atapa nahi.

to be hungry. atapa.

to slide along. tikukuprou.

to slide along. ikuku.

to separate the buttocks. horihikei.

beautiful, splendid. pernoshi.

what am I going to say then when I participate in the nocturnal ceremonial dialogue. weti naha ke a wãri kuu puhio yaro, wa the ã rãmai ta ke.

to participate in the wayamou, to sing to the hekura during the night, to sing at night (bird). rãrayou.

they bathe in the water. nar en el agua (suj.

to bathe. nar.

a moment ago I hit a pigeon. hoya ya wai tihekiprarei kuroi.

to start to reach or hit a target with an arrow or pointed object. tihekiprai.

qué grande es el árbol que está aquí. kurahe eyeha re hi wai ta prepe.

big, large. prepe.

I am the song of the Yoreshiãriwe spirit that passes by. yoreshiãriwe ya ãmoãmo re hayuope ye.

The night demons passed by. weyari pe re hayuyonowei.

to pass by, to go past. hayuope.

deer. yora.

the demon (that knocks people down by kicking them) had just finished building a platform around a huge algarrobo tree. kãrãnãri ãro kohi pata yotoharimai tutoonowei ha.

just finished, just completed. tutoonowei.

I only managed to graze the tapirs (with the arrows I shot at them). ware ya pe shiro si tikekerarema.

to graze, scratch. tikekeo.

plant, carricillo; Olyra latifolia (Poaceae). horema u siki.

to have covered one. oromashimorayou.

to rise in great. yoruku.

to cure a seriously ill person. kaihimarei.

dense vegetation. prorururayou.

to become painful. ninikei.

he inclined towards the ground to listen (the subject is in a tree). the yimika wãri ha tapraikuni, the mi wãri ha tepraikuni.

to incline towards the ground. yehe.

to become spicy (food). prakipiprou.

tree of the Lauraceae family. shirimahi.

¡atención, sus voces se hunden bajo tierra. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

to disappear by sinking into something; to be swallowed, submerged. oho.

to become dark (at dusk). itutuprou.

night fell again and the pain did not ease at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to heal a little, to be a little better. fmanahehe.

that is going to fall. a no kerayopi.

it is going to fall. kerayopi.

(in the) Yanomami language. yãnomãmi the.

Yanomami (language/people). yanomami.

the women burst out laughing. suwe ke pe shoaproturou.

burst out laughing. shoaproturou.

the tree is entangled. hii hãã.

to be entangled, to be caught. fãã.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

became spacious (perfective of the inchoative form). yaweterayou.

to clean, erase, etc. in a careless manner, without insisting. hãhitai.

Yoawe sat down completely ashamed. yoawe ke a wãri kirihiwe kãi re roonowei.

to be ashamed, to be afraid. roonowei.

make the strips flexible, make a hammock with a braid that joins the strips at the center, and then offer it to me. wa e the ki ha uhutitiprarini, wa e the ki peushoku ha tiyeprarini.

to make a hammock by braiding strips of bark together at the center. peushoku.

Rabipelado utilized several times the aphrodisiac kumi to seduce the two women. nãroriweni suwe ke kipi kumimama.

Rabipelado (a mythological figure). nãroriweni.

I am hungry. hi monapi.

to be hungry. monapi.

it took little time for the turtle's head to suddenly droop (from illness). poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni.

to be gravely ill. reipraikuni.

gray hair. ire.

the honey sprang forth immediately. puu ke u pe hirekea re shoarayouwei (mit.

to jump, to spring forth. hireke.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

have you offered (something). yaikihawe.

edible fruit of the shãpre uhi tree. shãpre.

to become short. homotoprou.

juvenile acne. shohe mo.

(classifier noun). mo.

to go ahead, to lead the way. ora-tou.

he woke up. moka* wakataai.

to wake up. moka*.

Zizyphus cinnamomum tree (Rhamnaceae). arowaye ãsihi.

tree. ãsihi.

from now on I have no intention of allowing our possessions to be given away (to visitors). hei tehe kamiyeni ya matohipi no hipeamapimi totihiwe.

to have no intention of allowing something to be given. hipeamapimi.

aspirate the soft pulp. wapumi.

I approached a place where there was a wasp nest, they emerged suddenly from the nest and I started running. ya re ikuowei hami kopina a yeteoma, naki ha preshepraruni ya rererayoma.

to emerge suddenly; to surge; to exude. presheprou.

cool, fresh. ruwemou.

to be completely deformed, twisted. wãpreterayou.

We will eat the fish here, then we will depart. heha yuri peheki ha warini, peheki huu kooheripe.

to leave, to depart. kooheripe.

a type of classifier for trees. uthahi.

ay, our voices sink under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

the turtle retracted its head (into its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

to slide along; to slip through the hands; to sink. wahokei.

to separate the buttocks for a moment. horihitou.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Toucan was carrying on his back a machete whose blade was shining, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. hãthoikuni.

to eat. reye.

the woman remained (in the tree). suwe ke the tikea shi wãriã ha yaiaruni.

to remain in a state, to not cease. yaiaruni.

and that is the reason why I was invited. e naha a kuu puhio yaro kahiki hoã rea mi paa kupiyeni.

to be invited. kupiyeni.

They live close. pe peria ahetea: ellos viven cerca.

You are still really (too) close. wa ahetepraa totihia ke a kure: todavía estás realmente (demasiado) cerca.

close. ahetea.

tonina, freshwater dolphin; Inia geoffrensis (Iniidae). torina.

the meat is tender. yaro a epehewe.

the bow is too flexible. hãto nahi a epehewe.

not offer resistance to penetration; not be solid (a bond); be tender (a food); not be rigid. hirikamou.

in the past the Waika did not know the croaking of the little frog wawa hena. waika ke peni wawa ke the hena wã hapa tanomihe.

small frog (probably of the genus Hyla). wawa.

the jaguar was dragging the dead woman while the child was perched in the tree. irani suwe ke a nomawe re shaireheriiwei, ihiru a ma tikeo tehe.

to drag, to pull along the ground; to abduct a woman by force. shaikei.

hole left in the mud by the beak of the green ibis when searching for worms. koromãri husi wãno ka.

green ibis bird (Mesembrinibis cayennensis). koromãri.

it seems that no one has missed their target, all return with a paují. wãri ai the norãmi yakemai mahei, paruri pe kãi pata koã haikitapeihe.

all return with a paují. haikitapeihe.

he had caught fish and was carrying the bundle on his back. yuri e ki yokerarema e hãro ha yehireni.

to catch several fish. yokerarei.

to cause eye irritation. mamo fraarei.

the chili pepper burns my eye. praki ani yare mamo fraamai.

to cause a very strong eye irritation. fraarei.

the Yawari woman has transformed me, so let my mental faculties change. yãwãriyoma ware shi ha wãrimarini, ya puhi aithaa ta toithipe.

1. Woman belonging to the Yawari people. 2. White or Creole woman, when mentioned during the wayamou ceremony.. yãwãriyoma.

how quickly the gossip spreads. kurahe wãno pe ma re imikouwei.

to spread quickly. imikouwei.

opposite of . shi katehe.

the bamboo arrows of the type ruhu masi split easily. ruhu masi pe tikaroo si ihehewe.

to split (a long object). tikaroo.

1) To express oneself using a different speech from the local one. 2) To name regions, places, communities (during a ceremonial dialogue). 3) Female spirit that knows all the named places and accompanies shamans when they take an immaterial form to go to other communities with the purpose of killing. She also intervenes in discussions that arise during conflicts.. kahiramou.

arrow to which the feathering has been tied (synonym). shereka he okãma.

her older female relative, who is there, if only we could live in adjacent homes. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

older female relative. amipi.

the night. the mi titi.

ant. titi.

draw a thick line on the chin and around the mouth. kahiki warukuo.

draw a thick line. waruku.

in his house I hung my hammock in an oblique direction towards the central plaza of the dwelling (from the lower to the higher part of the dwelling's roof). kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

hang one. hehãpramou.

he slept, then he set off again (making the leaves crunch). a mioma, shurushurua korãyoherima.

to return directly, to go back directly. korãyoherima.

the tree is hooking with another. hi mi thorukuai.

to have bent/curved/folded under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; to have a tree hooked with another when falling. thorukurayou.

to smooth, to make smooth and moist. frakaha.

that hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

to hurt someone. hamirayou.

(speaks of upriver). kahu upe kreshe.

he really didn't have luck (to be here). a no wãi shi hiropraroma ke.

brought misfortune/bad luck. hiropraroma.

"he had not said to himself that the fruits were extremely hard and that it was better to give up on them". "the prohohowemi ha ya the ha ta tiratai", a kunomi.

to be firmly tied, to be tied by a very tight rope. proomi.

the walkway extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

to walk through the forest. yashokou.

they gathered (and then someone said). the pe yototai ha kuparuni.

to remain together for a long time. yototorayou.

very early in the morning she hung the bundle from the hammock rope of her father (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

she hung the bundle from the hammock rope of her father. feamapeiwei.

for. por.

they struck the great rock, but only tiny fragments broke off and fell. maa maki pata tuyeihe, ãshãkãre e ma pe wai shiro prariroma.

the tree's splinters transformed into yaraka fish. ãshãkãre mahiki re kui, yaraka pe kuprariyoma.

fragment, splinter. ãshãkãre.

I won't give it without receiving anything in return, prepare cotton yarn and you will get it. shiroko ha mai ke, shinari wama uko pe ha thararini wama the pe rurayorupe.

we go to the forest without taking anything (lit. shiroko tutuai totihio kuperei.

to take something without giving anything in return; to be empty (flashlight without batteries); to return empty-handed (from hunting or fishing). thararini.

they are lazy. kama pe mohi.

they are bad. kama pe wãritiwe.

they have worked in the field. kama pe hikarimoma.

they, them. kama pe.

the weather is rainy. the maapi.

rainy. maapi.

using their fingers, they painted themselves quickly around the eyes with the brains of Rabipelado. nãro heyoshi pe re kui, pei mamo kasiki hami heyoshi pe wai hãhihãhitaakema.

they painted themselves quickly around the eyes with the brains of Rabipelado. hãhihãhitaakema.

to draw a transverse line once, to paint a transverse line. yãprutaai.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to become slightly reddish, to turn reddish. teãyããi.

vuestros cuerpos no exhalan el olor del onoto. ni patheo ma re maohe ke.

exhale the smell. patheprou.

downward path. fyo mi werewe.

Titiri flapped his wings to (make fall) his parasites. titiri pei ke nomapi re yahuhuprouwei (mit.

to flap wings in one place, to flap wings without flying (a bird). yahuhuprouwei.

plantas de yuca. haionomi.

(they) attack someone. nape rurooprou.

to attack someone without valid reason. rurooprou.

to catch the end of a fruit with the incisors and exert pressure to remove the seed from the shell. wãthemirei.

the capuchin monkeys began to nibble their lower lip. hoashiri pe kasi wetiwetipraroma.

they began to nibble their lower lip. wetiwetipraroma.

the cave of Yotenama had a strange smell of a wild beast. yotenama ke theka ni pata yaithapi ni huthethewe yaiwe.

to have a strong, dense smell of a wild beast. huthethewe.

to eat a little, for a short time. iyatou.

to go in search of the pei mi ãmo stolen from a person to return it to them. mi ãmo koãi.

if the shamans take possession of a pei mi ãmo, you cannot make mistakes, you immediately identify its smell. hekura peni the mi ãmo tema, wãri re wa yakei mai, ihi re the ki ni rukea katitia re shoarayouwei (cha.

the immaterial component of the human person (lit.: the center). mi ãmo.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). ãototu.

(upriver speech). ikrã.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to put white down on one. horoprai.

row of woven leaves in a bundle. tehosisiãprarama.

to go. we-.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). fu.

small freshwater crab (unidentified). fu.

to be afraid. moyenapi.

the two demiurgs learned to make dangerous bamboo tips. prai re kupariyonowei.

hurry to go down. pe ithoai ta haitaru.

learned to make, transformed into, hurried to do something, passed quickly to another state. tariyo.

everyone knows that wherever I have gone, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco (by planting it in various places). nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma (mit.

to do/perform something in various places. totihiamapotayo.

(it) erodes, crumbles gradually. washishiai.

to erode, crumble gradually. washishi.

to move over something. eyeeyemou.

to build the part where one will live inside a communal house; to build a shelter in the forest. yãnomou.

go look for arrow canes at the edge of the cane thickets. shereka siki he wetikia re totihire ha a shereka ta ukahe she.

1. To border, limit (a surface) 2. To kill (said during a ceremonial dialogue). wetiki.

female spirit associated with the mashohara plant. mashoharayoma.

ithore 1 vb. ithore 1 vb. intr. intr. t ithoreai, inc. t ithoreai, inc. : to curve, to bend; to become curved, bent. : curvar, doblar; ponerse curvo, doblado.

curved. curvo.

Translation:. tori ke pe.

pulular. rãtãrãtã.

to be dark. ruwe.

it was the váquiros of body spotted like the leaves of the tokori tree that took possession of Sherekanawe. ware ke kini oni tokoripi hena raokowe ke kini sherekanawe a tereherima.

to be totally decorated with hand prints. raokowe.

he ate. a iyama.

he left. a hurayoma.

for a long time we remained grouped. yamaki hiratao heatima.

they killed their older brother. pe ãiwepi a sheremahe.

he came to join us. a warokeyoruma.

declarative past marker. -mahe.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to turn over, invert, exchange. hemihikei.

to scratch or make longitudinal lines once (perfective aspect). etitikei.

metallic noise caused by the clash of a machete blade against a hard object. sirisirimou.

to dry up, evaporate (perfective form). weherayou.

he put it quickly on his shoulder. pei ke hako ha the ruketarema.

he reached the feline on the shoulder. pei hako hami ira a tharema.

to have the shoulders, neck and chin painted with a uniform layer of dye. hako r u k e k e o.

shoulder. ruketarema.

to nibble something. wãfã wãewãemou.

to nibble. wãewãemou.

he went to the place in the forest where he hid his blowgun. thora ke a wãri romapope ha a hurayoma.

to hide objects in the forest. romapope.

I will prepare a wad of tobacco for him. pee ya nahe humikei.

to prepare a wad of tobacco. humitaai.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to be stiff, rigid. hitatawe.

I go to get wood with others. koã ya ãsho narei.

to obtain. narerei.

the jaguar killed the dog while it launched into pursuit of a picure. hiimani thomi a nosi ha tereherini, irani a sherema.

to launch into pursuit. tereherini.

to force an object into a too narrow opening (and get it stuck). hokoãmai.

she had introduced flowers in the lobe of her ears, and she looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

flower. thoruki.

to sneeze. esikamorayou.

I'm going to eat my peeled bananas cooked in water. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta wa ke.

Cook peeled bananas in water for me. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta tupa.

small banana variety. kurathaye.

to share the food of others. shoayou.

the hole that it has in the earlobe is small. pe the yimikaki ka wahakewemi.

he was really tiny, but his penis was gigantic. pei ke the wai wahakemi ma yaii, pei ke the mo pata kua ha yairaruni (mit.

small, tiny; being few. wahakewemi.

he conversed in a low voice. a wã wãhãniniwe wayoma.

to speak softly (after having spoken normally), to be soft after having been loud (noise). wãhãninitou.

1. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tiresheprou.

the attribute of the hekura (rihu u) was about to come to me, but since I was not staying still, it turned back. rihu uni ya nape mori ithou he yatiokirioma, kamiye ke ya he ha reshiproni a he tatokema.

to be restless, not stay still. reshiproni.

of the numerous váquiros, I will kill one, and then I will drink the broth of the cooked one. ei ke ki re huore, ke ki wãri ma thethei ha, ya ha hakoreni, ya pouku ta koa.

to kill (with an arrow). ihehe.

they conserve their plumes in the palm spathes that they slide under the roof. ihami paushi pe re titipouwehei.

they conserve their plumes. titipouwehei.

to be afraid. RNpisini.

to cut into several parts, to slice. hahetimai.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

shallow water. makekewe.

1. state: seed of hisiomi in formation. 2. verb (intransitive): to be in the process of forming and growing (seed of hisiomi). shirepi.

I eat. wã hemi.

to eat. hemi.

to make smaller, reduce, diminish, cause to melt. kuwetamai.

he didn't hit his wife but, angered, he immediately put his bent arm under his head. pe suwepi a shei mai, e hesika repraoma.

he lay in a hammock decorated with transverse strips, and immediately put his bent arm under his head. thoo ke thoku tipruta ha a perikema, a hesika repraoma.

to quickly place the bent arm under the head while lying in a hammock. hesika reprakei.

to curl up, to crouch with legs bent against the chest. pushukukei.

to bend/curve the tip of an object (perfective, plural object). toyekerariyo.

to do different things. yaiatarai.

to move hesitantly or falteringly. rãikikou.

that's how the pijiguaos are. hei naha rasha ke pe kuwe.

to be (in a certain way), to exist, to possess (a characteristic). kuwe.

the ta hiyo: give it. the ta hiyo: dalo.

paruri a kãi re hariiwehei, ipa pei pariki hiyohe (southern Orinoco speech): those who cooked the guan offer me a piece of breast. paruri a kãi re hariiwehei, ipa pei pariki hiyohe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

give. hiyo.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

eat. comemos.

it is used to give assent and also it can be The word 'se' in Yanomami means 'it'. se usa para dar el asentimiento.

it is used. se.

he always went alone to the forest to eat hidden. uruﬁ hami yãmi a shiro re iyai hãthoowei.

alone, hidden. hãthoowei.

killed (with an arrow), by carelessness, a child from Poriporimapiwei. canzado (con una ﬂecha), por descuido, a un niño de Poriporimapiwei.

killed (with an arrow), by carelessness. canzado.

to blow on the fire. koa wake ta horapa.

to blow on a fire for a long time, several times in a row (to light it, to revive it, to reanimate it). koa wake horai.

the Waika ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día (lit. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati.

to make something smell good, to perfume. kretriprou.

object whose edge has been folded several times over itself. kohewe.

to smell of urine. natheri.

fire. fueki.

just when Lizard reached the top of the scaffold he had built to get to the honey nest, Hairless blew the malefic substance on him. we oi ke a yotoharimai peshekuai tehe, nãroni a horaprarema (mit.

to place a pole between two trees to pass from one to the other; to build a scaffold in a tree whose trunk is too large to climb. yotohari.

to tense a bow. hãto nahi hithotheai.

to tense, to stretch. hithothe.

to be worried, to have a worried look. tikroko.

the cowboys were approaching us. ware ke ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

I did not see (the enemy warriors) carrying the little girl (who they had just kidnapped). suweheri ya wãri yehia taprai ma re maoperei.

epistemic modality suffix indicating uncertainty. perei.

to get up from a hammock. fithão.

the pava rajadora was on the top of the tree (and was not visible). mãrãshi a yaokokema.

to be on the top of a tree or branch across a dense space and, for this reason, not be visible from below. yaokokema.

it was because they had not desisted that they kept on groaning one after the other. the pe tiraprai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiataroma.

had not desisted. tiraprai.

to hit each other mutually with the flat part of a machete, to face each other ritually in this way; to fight with sticks. yoayorayou.

he plucked Titiri (shooting him with a blowgun dart). titiri u pe re tishishireiwei (mit.

hair; short feather or down; fiber. arapuri.

Bat split firewood by striking it against the ground. heweni koã ãsho yahekikema.

bat. heweni.

to step on the floor of the house, to visit a particular community. fyãno kapai.

it is necessary that you do it. wa wake ha thapani.

it is necessary to do. thapani.

a woman of Karohi (a community). k arohi theriyoma.

woman (member of a particular village or social group). arohi.

(he/she/it) started having a cramp. iyo.

to start having a cramp. iyo.

tree. porohoa.

to be completely dry, to stop being flooded (completely). washitiprou.

you are members of neighboring communities and want to wage war. yahitherimi wamaki niyãyou shi topraa yaro.

to be at war, to wage war. iyãyorayou.

the. te.

to disperse to do a battue or a search. rãkokoãi.

to have a knot at the tip, to be joined by a knot at the tip. moshokorea.

they approached furtively. prakerayou.

edible fruit of the guamo tree. krepo.

I first caught the fish by shooting them with arrows, then I killed them with a machete. sherekani yuri ya pe tiwehai parioma, siparani ya pe tuyei mahioma.

then, next, later, finally. erekani.

harpy eagle. Harpia.

I wanted to make her cure (by the shamans), and I prepared a potent hallucinogen. ya niya hupamani, ya the okewe thakei kuroi.

to want to make someone cure. hupamani.

to nibble, to chew slowly (the tip of a long and resistant object to break it). wenikai.

what is that. hei weti ke the.

what is it. weti ke the.

what is the cause. weti ke theni.

what?. the?.

each time he touched the two women, they were avoiding it. suwe ke kipi the wãri hore pakihiaprarope hami ke kipi hãroãpraroma.

they were avoiding it. hãroãpraroma.

the cut of the tree is deep. ka mi shoekewe.

the cut of the tree is deep. ka mi shoekewe.

¿quiénes son (esos seres) colgando de la punta de los cabellos y que zumban. weti pei ke pe hethauku ora hami, weti wa the ki reãã wã perikiwe.

colgados en gran número (como personas en chorros). perikiwe.

piece of wood whose sides have been flattened in this way. pahayema.

(he) spent the night again in a different place than where he usually lives. shoriwe tahiapi a he weyai shi ha topraoni.

to spend the night. he weyai.

we crossed the water passing through the morichal. eteweshi siki ha yamaki ha pekatutaparuni.

passing through, crossing. pekatutaparuni.

immediately, the otter started swimming under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the surface of water, behind the clouds (celestial body). ururuã.

we will make the birds smoke, little brother. kirithami pema pe makeprape, oãsi.

to place several objects on something, to place on a tray. makepraai.

to scratch oneself repeatedly. tikokorariyo.

ah, the woman could no longer stop laughing. suwe ke a ikã wã shoai ha tikothoni (mit.

laughter. ikã wã.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

animal. animal.

bed of leaves that has been used for making love. kokopi.

I ate wahara fruits. Wahara ke ki a huu.

fruit of the wahara tree. wahara.

with one fabricated with bone of cachicamo. moro ke iheapi yaini.

hook. iheapi.

if you insist, I will let myself be killed. wa hua he ha yatirini, wa shemoparu (mit.

to let oneself be hit in the chest or stomach, to let oneself be killed at the river. shemoparei.

to make (something cylindrical) roll or spin repeatedly. hamorimai.

to make (something cylindrical) roll or spin repeatedly. hamorimai.

in several places they have broken bushes by hand to mark the place where they passed, in a single place several trails cross. hii ke hi pe re keapotayouwehei, pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

to break bushes by hand to mark a path. tahiaikuni.

I got a migraine. ya heki ninipema.

I got a migraine. ninipema.

he hung the hammock up high again. isi ha pe ki hirihiã ha koikuni.

to hang a hammock. hirihikei.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic substance). hehete.

do not fear them. pe no kiri thatihehe.

do not fear them. thatihehe.

brother-in-law, behave well, you are not sitting properly. shoriwe a ta totihiparu she, wa rea toami yaiwe.

to be in a bad position; to live in poor conditions (often due to laziness or incompetence). toami.

to divide, to distribute in several parts (perfective, plural object). pashihirarei.

to present one. hesika rea.

to have a headache. yututu.

ritual of isolation and purification performed by women having their first period (and their husbands); ritual state of those who have committed or participated in a homicide. unokai mou.

ritual state of a woman having her first period, and of a homicide (or someone who has participated in a homicide). unokai.

he clung to the treetop, which bent under his weight, and stretched out his neck to see. hii ke the hi wai ihete noshi hariraai ha a oraki kayahaapraroma (mit.

Carpintero enano swelled up and the platform (on which the corpse was placed) spread out. ripuhusiriwe a ha shuwerini, hii hiki noshi hariraama (mit.

to extend, deploy, spread out, distend, dilate. hariraai.

to reach an excessively ripe state. poshoropiprou.

fruit of the yawara hi tree. yawara.

Mother-in-law, did the wapu fruit lose its bitterness. yapemi, wapu ke ki mihitaimi thawe. It has been soaking for a long time. the no nohi teteapiyei.

to lose bitterness, become edible. mihita.

desplazarse tendiendo las manos para protegerse. reaprarai.

Move in a line (and silently), like the chachalas. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

1. to line up, align; 2. to align, tighten (the strands of a basket). shanini.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). kasitamai.

the grease causes nausea. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to feel like vomiting. fp ariki shi harihiwe.

to have nausea, to feel like vomiting. harihou.

we must light a fire and spread the embers (to burn the land for planting). wa wake ha yerini, wa the ha yãrãreãrini (mit.

to spread, to scatter. yãrãreãi.

to be thin/slender, to be hairless/naked. mãroãi.

you will take these arrows when you participate in a long hunting trip. wa henimou ha wa ki pope.

go to the place where we have gone hunting and kill tapirs. hei koro ha pemaki ta henimoprei hami, wamaki ha hur oherini, ware ki ta niyaprari.

to participate in a long hunting trip. henimou.

to eat like a glutton. wausimoray.

They lifted the logs and searched for a long time. koã ke ãsho pe hãshãeãprama, the pe hãshãemai yaioma.

to lift and displace objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) in order to search for something underneath them. hãshãeãprama.

he arrived without weapons, he had lost his arrows. mãroko a kopema, shereka ke ki a ha hoyarini (mit.

he. mãroko.

to receive something that has been taken in a certain way. hukerarei.

he arrived near a small river, quickly gathered the head and threw it into the water. poko u ha a ha waroikuni, the he wãri ha hoketareni, pei u ha he sheyeparema.

is there honey. u pe re kur e.

water. yara.

to clean or polish (two objects). shutukaheprou.

the penis of Horemariwe penetrated under the ground. horemariwe moroshi si re pokeiwei.

to penetrate, to sink in. pokeiwei.

to probe a den that is underwater. hipikei.

leaves of tobacco in the fields (it is a sign that the plant is vigorous). ushuhou.

a type of macaw. iyeiyerimi.

the dog was called Tokorinawe, it was truly very large. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

tree; Cecropia orinocensis (Cecropiaceae). tokori.

in the places where a stream of water runs over the rocks that emerge, that is where you have to start drinking again (after initiation). pei masi ha u wai yoãyoãmope ha wa u wai hapa koarei.

murmuring water. yoãyoãmope.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head, with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident. ruwei.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic substance). hehete.

they killed the peccaries and gave to drink the broth of the cooked (animals), they organized a funerary banquet. ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

they gave to drink the broth of the cooked (animal). niyamaheni.

to rub with the fingertips to clean. horoko.

have they all finished painting themselves. wamaki yãmoã ta hititiraruhawe.

to have oneself painted by someone. yãprãmou.

to sit stretching the legs. fmatha shaiprao.

1. To be lying face down. 2. To drag a part of the body on the ground.. shaiprao.

The man kept tightening Siroromi vigorously. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

1. To keep tightening or compressing forcefully. 2. To keep eyes closed. 3. To extinguish (a fire).. ãkikou.

for fun, to tap a termite nest with the hand so that they fall on someone's head and bite them. fhe yoothopei.

to give little taps with the fingers on an object to remove dirt or insects. yoothorei.

to separate the toes with the hand. fmamiki kakatai.

to separate, divide (multiple objects) with duration. kakai.

to tear, rip, break, separate, split, tear incompletely; tear at the edge (with the hand). kakaa.

to become numerous. thetheai.

a very dangerous wãrihotho demon will lodge in the body of a beautiful Yãnomãmi. yãnomãmi riyehewe ke the rii ha wãrihotho wãritiwe ke a niya shatio totihia kure.

to lodge, to be lodged, to be stuck. niyakema.

despiojar a una persona pasándole un peine por el pelo. ayakekai.

to arrive at someone. notikei.

to be hung in the void. reikiwe.

to be totally burned by fire, to receive the totality of something. wathepei.

he is afraid. shinaki puriwatowe.

to be afraid. puriwatowe.

it was because I defended myself alone that I am still alive. kamiye re ya nohi ha peyeoni ya rii t e m i.

to defend oneself, to protect oneself. peyeo.

to lift or pry something up using a long pointed object as a lever. iyorerei.

las hojas del árbol wakata gritan como las marimondas. wakata henaki re pashomorãkiri.

gritan como las marimondas. pashomorãkiri.

as it did not dawn they used up the firewood to keep warm. the pe he haruprarou ha maoni koã ãsho pe mi watherema.

did not dawn. haruprarou.

to be warned, reasonable; to be hospitable, respect social rules, be attentive to others (plural subject, dispersed). puhi hatukeprawe.

to divide it into many pieces, to divide it entirely. ayakosimai.

dented, deformed by a blow (in one place). wãukuã.

Oso hormiguero se echó de espaldas para dormir. wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to lie on one. rekekeikuni.

For the rain to stop, the children or women chant the following: "prararaiku, prararaiku. Para que pare la lluvia los niños o las mujeres canturrean lo siguiente: "prararaiku, prararaiku. ". ".

to make the rain diminish in intensity. prararaiku.

la piel de la serpiente karahiri es ancha. karahiri siki pata re praukupe ye.

ser vasto, extenso; ser amplio. praukupe.

to heal, to cure. hatukeprou.

the house of the enemies (lit. fira ke makayopi o kithanari ke makayopi.

piles of rocks. kithanari.

to become less dense, to become thinner, to clear up (low vegetation). takakaa.

hurry up to build a scaffold. m athakari pe ta thai hairaruhe she.

hurry up, rush. hairaru.

he suddenly appeared in the dwelling. yahi hami a shirimoma.

dwelling. shirimorayou.

to make love. morosi.

the blood was rising up along my chest. pei ya pariki hami iyepe torerepeherima.

the blood was rising up. torerepeherima.

to salt a food that is cooking on the fire. mositipei.

we will make love. pemaki ta kuwemo.

let me make love alone. yãmi ke ya ta kuwemo.

to allow someone to make love. kuwemomai.

night has fallen. mi ka supraprou.

night has fallen. supraprou.

they (went upriver) in turn. kama ke e ﬁmoni a shea mi hetupirema.

to do in turn, to alternate. hetupirema.

I sew a garment. iro ya siki tuyei.

I weave an open-weave basket. yorehi ya si tuyei.

he made a straight open weave and turned it into a tail. koma, a teshina thakema (mit.

to unite elements together: to lash a tree or palm; to knock down the earth; to darn, to weave; to tie together with vines by blows of a machete or knife, to enlarge an opening in that way (a den, a beehive, etc.); to bite (a snake). tuyerarei.

to paint, to dye several objects. frãihimararei.

you, you are content with eating (alone) little by little the wapu fruits. kaheni wapu wa ki wapraai poo e.

you don't matter to me. k ahe wamaki kuo poo.

to do (without caring about the consequences), to do (without apparent reason); to be content with. puo.

He has stiff and stuck together hair. Uu shititiwe ama.

to have stiff and stuck together hair. shititiwe.

we went down quickly to the river when it was pitch dark night. yamaki keo ha ropaoparuni, mi ka komi totihiwe.

night. ropaoparuni.

to shrink, reduce. horotou.

the curiara is in the middle of the water. k anawa mi ãmo hami a kãtãyoa.

in the middle of the water. kãtãyoa.

receiving visitors with shouts and noise. teraramou.

to clean, to polish (an object). shutukaheai.

to scratch the cavity that separates the toes by passing an object between them (a piece of wood, a cloth, etc.). kakekou.

crawl, walk crouched. tereke.

to become numerous. yaharaprou.

to make yellow, to let burn; to make a hammock turn yellow, unintentionally, by hanging it too close to the fire. frãrããmai.

to paint several circles on one. tipipramorayou.

when they were close, they gathered to bathe. pe oweai tehe pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma.

were close. oweai.

to be agitated in different places. lu-hirehire.

to drop, throw, let fall from above, intentionally let something fall while being up in a tree [kemakei, perf. kemai: tirar, lanzar, dejar caer desde lo alto, dejar caer algo voluntariamente estando arriba de un árbol [kemakei, perf. : to make fall, throw in a different place]. : hacer caer, tirar en un lu.

in different places. lu-.

to have a bulging torso, to have a prominent chest (offensive). fpariki yekehiwe.

I was biting my tongue. ya aka wetioma.

I was biting my tongue. wetioma.

downstream, in the conuco, there are really only two short bunches of plantains. porakapi kuratha ke kipi wai onohowe yaua totihia kupiyekiri.

short, brief; briefly, to do something for a short time. onohowe.

the ripe plantain smelled good, he cut several pieces with his incisors and ate them quickly in that way, finishing it. kuratha a ni kreteri ha a ha weheriararini, a mi watherema.

to eat quickly in that way. weheriararini.

do not gather in large numbers. pe mi shuããtihe.

do not gather in large numbers. shuããtihe.

to remain standing for a moment. upraprao.

to obstruct a place (durative). paimimai.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. wã hu.

don't laugh at me. yare noka ikãi mai.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãm a.

did they not kill one of mine. fyare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to laugh mockingly, to make fun of someone by laughing. ikão.

to arch, to curve upwards. yãprekerayou.

It turns into the shoroshoro ãhi tree (Cecropiaceae). Pl.

to turn into. shoripiai.

let's (the two of us) burn the bee nest. kopina ke yahe hisikai.

bee nest. kopina.

the strong smell of the watota brew impregnates the cotton hammocks and you name it (= you recognize it) without a doubt. watota ke u nakini yii ke ki ni watota re ke ki rukerayou ha, epena re a wayu ha wa the si poprai katitia re shoarayouwei.

malefic, feathery; seems like a blanket; wraps and suffocates men. watota.

to have a desire for. naikaai.

they transformed into birds. pe kuprariyoma.

he got angry. a hushutariyoma.

learned, transformed into (perfective form of certain verbs). tariy.

to separate, to be separated from others. sherereo.

al que ladra, colócalo alrededor de mi cuello (= dame un perro). hei a re houhoumouwei, pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

neck (more specifically). houhoumouwei.

to have come off locally (skin of a smoked fish). proprokoa.

to make a place impenetrable (by accumulation of felled trees). rasisiamai.

tener un ojo vuelto. mamo henowe.

estado. heno.

1. To add the ashes (from the ama tree) to the yopo powder by pressing them against the palms of the hands held between the thighs. 2. To roll a vine between the palms of the hands to probe.. hitikiai.

to make love in a hammock, to convert it into a place where love was made. kokopiamai.

to straighten (make straight or rectilinear) [plural objects]; to give something directly to someone, without intermediaries. shaririakei.

entorchado, envuelto, enrollado sobre sí mismo, enroscado. yãthoriwe.

hekura associated with the tips of piasaba (Arecaceae) palm. piakanariwe.

to become slightly red. shopohoprou.

although I lack matches, I do not say: "I will work to get matches" (lit. ya ma horimou tehe, "pohoroye ya hiki no ohote ta thaa sho", ya kuu mai.

to have no intention of working to obtain something. pohoroye.

the woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now. mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma.

to dry, to become dry (of a wet object). washiti.

to extend the wings. hehe.

receive a part. shekerepei.

the tábanos have the sucking tip flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahaai.

to be deep. ka praha.

they called the others who dismembered the animal. pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni.

to cry for a dead person. pokomorãyou.

I imitated the call of the gallineta bird, and it responded immediately. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

responded immediately. nokaprariyo.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, do not bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to rub, to place against, to slide along; to knock an object out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikiãi.

I got sick from the fat of the cajaro. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, I imagine very distant things. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

to lose one. wãrimarei.

(they two) dried up the water hole where Rahararitawe lived, and he, dying of thirst and crying, ran around because of them. a no hete ha wehemaparini, rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama.

they dried up. wehemaparini.

to descend a slope. mi wetei.

to descend a slope. wete.

he sent Arrendajo (to harvest fruits). ãyãkorãriwe a shimirema.

to send someone to do something; to send something to someone. shimãi.

to be too high (wall of an object), to become concave on the outside. wapokai.

moths. uwãuwãmi.

while Oso hormiguero was going around in circles, the woman went straight back home. shokou hoo tehe, poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriimaprou.

to be the first to go to a place. shodo.

wasp (unidentified). yeikatarawe.

you go away (return to your home). a ta kopoheri.

to go away, to leave, to depart. kopoheri.

they cut off the jaguar's head. ira ke he pata pahetiprai ha kuparuheni.

to cut, to chop off, to decapitate. paheti.

Do you (plural) eat bananas. kuratha a ha wamaki iyai ma ta thawe.

Is that enough. e naha thawe.

What am I going to do then. fweti naha ma ta thawe.

And then. fwhw ta thawe.

interrogative particle. thawe.

they came to defend him, otherwise the jaguar would have finished tearing out his eyes. the pe nohi peyerema ha tharei irani the mamo no hokea he yatiroyopi ha.

to defend someone, to protect someone, to come to someone. peyerema.

kopohe: your husband has just arrived. heãhãturiwe : kopohe: justamente tu esposo acaba de llegar.

demonio maligno de la clase yai the asociado a terrenos movedizos. kopohe.

where is my axe. weti hami pooye koshi.

axe. pooye.

he will visit. a yahi no hetepraiwe.

he will visit. hetepraiwe.

it became completely dark while we were eating. yamaki iyai tehe, yamaki ka he komãrãyou.

to become completely dark (night). komãrãyou.

1. to curl up (animal, dog) [perfective form]. 2. to arrange several objects in a circular form, to arrange leaves around the edge of a basket [perfective form]. 3. to be arranged in a circular manner, to form an arc of a circle. fweyomahiki koi watowe: to have very arched eyebrows.. wathokei.

when all the machetes have been given, it is not possible to offer others. pe pe siparapi hititio yaio ke tehe, ai ke the no yeteopi mai.

to be added to. yetea.

to dry, to harden, to smoke (something). weheti.

when you collected the bones of the cremated dead, did you carefully search (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

1. to flee, take refuge in dense vegetation; 2. to search for an object mixed among others, to search for scattered or intermingled fragments. proruruprou.

father-in-law, father-in-law, here is the honey (of the mashipuma species). shoape, shoapemi, hei mashipuma ke a kua kure.

your father-in-law. shoahe.

to have replicated immediately. nokamorayou.

two beautiful women have just arrived at the house. riyehewe ke kipi suwe kopei kuhe.

the high tobacco leaves are beautiful and abundant. hisihisi pee re nahe pata riyehewe yorukou thare.

to beautify, to make beautiful. riyehou.

lizard (unidentified). sharaima akatho.

we moved away quickly and silently. rope yamaki kareherima.

to move away quickly and silently. kareherima.

tree, canachi; Tachigali paniculata (Leg. kanaye ninihi.

tree. ninihi.

Once burned, its ashes are used to prepare a condiment. nta).

a plant. nta.

tell my little brother to accompany us. oãsiwe pema a re nokamapore.

to make someone accompany, to tell someone to come. nokamapou.

we set out, we got going. yamaki ha huroherini.

we set out, we got going. huroherini.

to paint or draw a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch transversely once. tiprutukei.

perfect form of the inchoative verb . ishirayou.

the old woman sang the song of anger. suwe patani the ã wãyoã thapema.

anger, wrath. wãyoã.

to become dusty, to cover oneself with dust. hekrãpiãi.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty of inhabitants (dwelling, camp). roroko.

to split lengthwise, to crack down the middle (an object). ikrãkããi.

to relax, loosen, undo (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). hihorayou.

when he recovers consciousness, he will start climbing again. a harou tehe a tuo kope.

to recover consciousness (plural subject). haroprou.

I will slip between the felled large trees and kill you all. kayapa hiki mohe re yoare hami ya hirerea he ha yatiikuni ya pe wãri waikape.

large tree. kayapa.

help someone follow a trail correctly. katitimapou.

you are not able to find the tracks of the hekura (= you are not good shamans). hekura wama pe mãyo no ihipia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

it is his footprint, he is the culprit, and no one else. ihi mãyo, shomi the mãyomi.

enemy. mãyo.

little does it matter that he comes with the intention of throwing a magic substance at me stealthily. yare niya ma hãthomai tehe, enaha ware thapou ta petao.

they left stealthily with a (stolen) woman (with her consent). suwe ke a kãi wãri hãthoprariyomahe.

to approach someone stealthily (to throw a magic substance at them). hãtho.

grew (plural object). patarariyo.

are the poles enough. wa the hiki ou ta yai thawe.

to be enough. ou.

obstruir un lugar. paimiãmãi.

to become extensive. praukuprou.

she deposited the two demiurges (who had just been born) in a spathe of the kanaposi palm and covered them with a dense layer of leaves (to hide them). kanaposi ha omawe ke kipi ha pakini, ke kipi he yohoa sutaa ha shoakini.

a dense layer or covering (of leaves). shoakini.

diurnal butterflies. hurahura.

I am happy. humoromi henaki.

to be happy. humoromi.

Mujeroso hormiguero, cuyos pelos del pubis se veían incluso cuando estaba de espaldas (por ser tan abundantes y largos), era su suegra. hapramonowei.

to cure a wound by applying a medicine; to disinfect a wound. herimai (neol.

magical substance; to cure a wound by applying a medicine; to disinfect a wound. yoporo.

he went over there to examine the paths. kihami pei ke yoka pe horea miãprarama.

to move around looking carefully, to search for something in that way. miãprarama.

having accelerated breathing. hereherewe.

to choose, select; to flatten, make flat. makeherayou.

to receive a large quantity. ripei.

to cause breathlessness, to cause fatigue. wãshimimai.

the Female-toucan with the pubis pululant with lice. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

the resplendent Female-toucans gathered together. mayepiriyoma ke pe riyehewe no shi harirawe, the ki tishoshai piyekoma.

Female spirit associated with the toucan. mayepiriyoma.

he smoothed the monkey's tail. wisha ke teshina hokokama.

younger brother, that shaman standing there will rub the arrows, and you will become a good hunter again. prake ha a re u p r aopariyowei, pusi ei ke ki re kui, ke ki re hokokoapareiwei.

to caress, to smooth (hair); to massage, to rub a sick person during a shamanic cure. hokokai.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

to build a temporary shelter. kumou.

he returned to sit down on the path. pei yo hami a wãri roo kootayoma.

sat down on the path. kootayoma.

after having camped in the forest he returned to live in the communal dwelling. a kãi peria fa totihitaikuni, a kãi fa shaponoikuni.

to come to live in the communal dwelling after having camped in the forest for a more or less long period. shaponoãi.

I learn the songs (or words) of the Shamathari, you will not retain them. kihi a re shamatharirati ya wã rii ha teaprani, kafeni wa wã titipou mrai ke the.

to not retain, to not learn (a song, ceremonial speech passage). kafeni.

he was afraid of the arrows. a kirirariyoma.

he was generous with his bamboo arrows (lament). ipa rafakapi totooreelowe ke.

bamboo arrow. marariyo.

to split longitudinally. ekokoai.

to arrive after others. fkoã.

to gather, to assemble. thouhu.

the child is hungry. shirãkomi ãmosi henaki.

to be hungry. ãmosi.

to suck in, to sip (the flesh of a fish bone, the marrow of a bone, the juice of a sugar cane, etc.). ususai.

(unidentified vine). koapi ãshithoku.

vines or climbing plants. hithoku.

to harvest fruits by knocking them down with a long pole with a narrow fork at the end. hiye.

Hewethawe died and his wife followed him in death. Hewethawe a nomai ha kuikuni, pe suwepi sho a no1 v.

A proper name. Hewethawe.

to harass. wetirei.

they heard the cries of the child. ihiru a miã wã hiriremahe.

they heard the cries of the child. hiriremahe.

vine. bejuco.

Hilera de hojas trenzadas del techo de un shapono. yãprãwe.

desapareceré. ya nohi mohotua totihirayou.

desapareceré. mohotua.

the sun will decline. mothoka kaiprariyo.

the sun will decline. kaiprariyo.

the Yanomami gathered on a ledge. the poyoyootayope ha yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

they gathered on a ledge/platform. poyoyootayope.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. movimienkimarihe.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. movimienkimarihe.

stay calm. yãnikiwe a ta kuiku.

we have built the house without rushing. kamiye yamakini yãniki yama nahi thama.

tranquil, calm; to do something calmly, without hurry. yãnikiwe.

The man had just initiated himself as a shaman, he arrived near some termites that were standing there with their heads covered in white down. yãnomãmi thaamamo no tute ke the, osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

1. To initiate as a shaman. 2. To reserve a portion, keep food for someone temporarily absent.. tha.

to make sharp, to sharpen. namokei.

(they two) dried out the water hole where Rahararitawe lived, and he, dying of thirst and crying, because of them ran from side to side (looking for water). a no hete ha wehemaparini, rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama (mit.

to make dry, to dry out; to protect from rain. wehemarei.

he went towards the place where I was standing. ya upraope ha a warokeyoruma.

Toucan was standing in front of the entrance. pei yoka hami mayepirithawe a upraoma.

to begin to be able to stand (a small child); to stop, to stand still, to be standing, to be ambushed (standing). upraprou.

the tobacco quid is soft (has too much water). pee nahe uwe.

the wound is oozing. warasi a uwe.

to ooze, to exude, to seep. uweai.

not be completely full. hayaroprawe.

when the plantains reached maturity he said: "go kill game animals for me". kuratha e pe hãmoprou tehe a wã hai shoaom a: "yaroye ke a ta thahe".

to have matured, to have reached maturity. hãmorayou.

extremo de la flecha que porta las plumas. fshereka pei he.

acariciar, frotar las flechas pertenecientes a un hombre que ha perdido su habilidad para cazar, con el fin de que la recupere. fshereka hokokai.

ellos sueltan sus flechas, flechas que van a buscar a pesar de todo. shereka pe huheamakei, pe shereka koã he yatiarareihe.

arrow. fshereka.

flame that goes out and rekindles repeatedly, one after the other. waketou.

people of the lowlands. koro*.

(he) asked Puerco espín. hoperiwe iha e the wãrima.

designates a hekura or a mythical ancestor. -riwe.

the girl who had her first period, and who was isolated behind the menstrual hut leaves, came out without anyone noticing. yipi re henaki hishomi ha ai re a suwe re yipimouwei, a haa hãthorema.

menstrual hut. hãthorema.

to receive an object that has been taken off. hayupei.

the nutria had curled up at the bottom of a small hole. wãisipi ke theka wai ha proro ke a hikiniã waikirayoherima.

to be compressed, to be curled up. hikinio.

to cook a food item in this way in order to give it as a gift. rãmikei.

We will eat the fish here, then we will depart. heha yuri peheki ha warini, peheki huu kooheripe.

to leave, to depart. kooheripe.

to think suddenly. hãhi.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pamento.

to scatter one by one (fruits, flowers, etc.). moririrariyou.

the grease gives nausea. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to have nausea, to feel like vomiting. harihiwe.

to have a headache. yututu.

to align in the center of the dwelling. shaniniprou.

to buzz. reãã.

to paint transverse lines on the body; to draw a transverse line on something/someone; to scratch transversely. tiprutu.

let an enemy escape. he hihoataramai.

loosen, make looser. hihop.

beyond the place where the Waika live, the tapirs rub against the trees all day long (lit. waika pe hiraope hami, the he tore hami, shamari ke a pata mãrikãi he re weyaraturei.

to be during the whole day in a given situation. weyaraturei.

to grab (once) a person with all one. huweheai.

the chicken ran with its wings extended. kakara ihirupi hehewe a rereapraroma.

to extend the wings for a moment. hehehou.

to speak. kati.

(upriver dialect). hohorimi (habla de río arriba.

variety of banana; Musa paradisiaca (Musaceae). hohorimi.

we progressed slowly downstream, one after another. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

progressed slowly one after another. hirihirayou.

The mapanares have come here to raise their heads. aroami ke ki oraki re yareheikiyohe e ye.

a type of venomous snake. mapanare.

it turns out that, as they walked, they fixed the big stone perpendicularly (to the ground). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe (mit.

to plant, fix, hinge, pin; to fix an object perpendicularly to another; to hook a fishing line to the bottom of the water. thei.

became deep. tarokei.

due to being pregnant, she cannot walk fast. the haiprou ha maoni.

to walk fast. haitou.

to be angry. pakiko.

(what happens) there and respond immediately (to what is said about you). mira (lo que ocurre) allá y responde inmediatamente (a lo que se dice de ti).

immediately (when one is questioned, criticized). haiikuni.

saltarín, poseedor de mostacillas, cruza un collar alrededor de mi pecho, yo me engalanaré ante aquélla que, allá abajo, tiene hendido el extremo de un poste de su casa. kihi a no topepi re niyaope, weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, kihi totahi re sheteterati ke ki iha, ya ki kãi ta huyamou ta yaio.

to be split, to be separated (end of a long object). eteteprawe.

he was transporting a bunch of seje palm fruits on his back. hoko a yehipoherima.

tomorrow I will cut a pijiguao palm, and on the way I will make a club (with it). henaha rasha ya si tuyei, himo ke ya thapraheripe.

to transport or carry something while moving. yehipoherima.

to give something without asking for anything in return, to give freely. fshiroko ha.

to give something without asking for anything in return, to give freely. fshiroko.

he repeats the same thing. nohi yairei.

to choose for oneself, to repeat the same thing. yairei.

to blink, to flutter the eyelids. misi mitamitamo.

to make the dye, to turn green. ushuhuai.

demons of disease. fomaweri.

in this region in where viven los Waika fearless. nosi wai ahihiwemi re perire hami.

to be fearless, daring. ahihiwemi.

while they were crying over the death of the dog, they were getting up. a no miã potiihe tehe, hiima ke a wã kãi re hokepramarenowehei (mit.

they were getting up. hokepramarenowehei.

to free oneself forcefully from someone's grip: for a young child to forcefully free themselves from their parent's grip before acquiring their double animal (a boy from his father, a girl from her mother). fikãriãi: liberarse animal doble de los niños pequeños, antes de bruscamente de la prensión de otra persona, que estos adquieran el de sus padres (un niño el deshacerse con vigor de una sujeción.

to free oneself forcefully from someone. fikã.

to move over something. eyeeyemo.

night monkey, dormouse. trivirgatus.

to take out a part of a whole to give as a gift. shetekekei.

to close one eye halfway. mamoka wãtetetou.

to close one eye halfway. wãtetetou.

they cut bushes into pieces that they used as levers to displace the huge penis. hii ke hi ha pahetirariheni, the mo pata hirurama.

they cut into pieces (e.g. bushes used as levers to move a huge penis). pahetirariheni.

he still has the clothes in his hand. ei siki hoã hohipou shoaa.

to have, to hold in the hand. hohipou.

noise, sound. horã.

to be happy. sheshehe.

hermano mayor, sostente un momento firmemente. ãi a wãri ta rohothotaru.

sostente un momento firmemente. rohothotaru.

to have become a little fat, to have a little fat after having been thin (and often, sick). shãrokorãriyo.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the rear part of a canoe; to walk behind. korot.

to remain lying on belly for a short time. reheprao.

to let a substance lose its effect or flavor through negligence. okeamai.

while Jaguar lay on the ground breathing with difficulty, they (two) went back down (from the tree). irariwe ke a hethekou mao tehe, a wãri prao tehe, ke kipi hithoa ha koruni.

to breathe with difficulty. hethekou.

hekura associated with the turtle. totorifanawe.

to damage the edge of a tool in several places by striking it against a hard object. yakekamai.

noise that arrows make. tãrãtãrãi.

we want (both) them to pass us, that's why. yahe pe niya re hayuamakiriowei, yaheki uprapekirio.

we want them to pass us. hayuamakiriowei.

give me a bamboo tip, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to surpass, to be beyond a certain limit or place. torehe.

to become numb. harihiai.

if it rains you have to place yourself in the center of your group. maa a kei ha mi ãmo ha re wa re romapareiwehei.

you have to place yourself in the center of your group. romapareiwehei.

a type of bird; Tachyphonus sp. (Thraupidae). mraaV.

I will tell (the Spider-monkey Spirit) to project its hairs on the path of the yawari (to dissuade them from coming). yawari ya pe mãyo he horoaiwe.

to smear one's hands with heri. fimiki he horomou.

a type of plant or substance. heri.

the horoeti trees break easily. horoeti hi pe kreyou si ihehewe.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

he gets angry for no reason. a hushuo si ihehewe.

frequently; certainly, without a doubt. ihehei.

we are in the company of people who are not from our community, but nevertheless we are the ones who tie the arrow canes in the middle (that we have just collected, to transport them). kamiye yamaki re heshihiomopotayouwei, shereka ke yama peishoku pata re thaamaperei.

to find oneself in the company of people from another community or many other communities. heshihio.

bruscamente, él puso la mano sobre las hojas inclinadas. enaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to put one. iprushi.

to make something spin with the arm (as when using a sling or bolas); to detach an object that is fixed to another (or to the ground), by pushing it slightly from side to side; to remove a bamboo arrowhead from the shaft in which it is inserted. yãwetãi.

come to pour it here. eyeha the ta ripraayohe.

to give by pouring to several people. riakei.

we set up camp at the place where a dry stream flows into the river. yamaki perikei: instalamos el campamento en el lugar donde un caño seco desemboca en el río.

dry place. hashipe.

they would have liked to tell him to do it. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

I go by land with the others. hashiri hami ya kuaai nareoherii.

to participate in an activity, to do something with others, to be in the same state as. Herasimari.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

to grow a little, to begin to grow (terminative form). preãkãprou.

mata a las hormigas konakona con brasas, golpeando tizones entre sí. konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to start doing something. yashishiprai.

we start running again and we quickly put ourselves inside. yamaki rereai kuaai kooheri ha, yetu ke yamaki titetetariyoma.

to put oneself inside. titeterayou.

to keep something covered. popou.

to turn to dust. kopehe.

"sokã, sokã. "sokã, sokã. " (onomatopoeic sound). ".

onomatopoeic sound. sokã.

to be in shreds, to be too cooked (fish meat). kohihipi.

I will make them cry (by killing one of their relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

I will make them cry (by killing one of their relatives). hoyamaiwe.

in an instant we painted our faces black and on that background, we traced sinuous lines with our nails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

they traced lines on their faces. tikekerariyo.

to lower, to bring down (something that is too high). totakei.

en los ojos, allí donde treparon los gusanos, pululan termitas. ereerema re kona shipe rãirãiprarou.

pulular. rãirãiprarou.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

superficially (by something or someone). yahepramai.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain Spirit shakes the ends of the house poles. ei maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe.

the poles or posts used to construct a house or camp in the forest. mitihe.

now they are returning to the collective dwelling. hei tehe the pe shimoo koã kupiyei.

to gather; to accumulate; to pile up. ihiye.

to cover one's eyes. mi kehuo.

to cover one. kehuo.

fyãno ithãã: to be, to exist (a dwelling, a temporary shelter). fyãno ithãã: ser, existir (una vivienda, un refugio provisional).

to exist. existir.

there are lightning flashes. the mi yãmimou.

to occur repeatedly (lightning). yãmiyãmimou.

to get something dirty by passing through it frequently. acostummai.

now that you have expelled the evil caused by the plant from his body, he will wake up healthy tomorrow. wa henaki re wayu hoyarihe, henaha totihitawe ke a hokeprariyo (cha.

the gallineta flew away. hãshimo a hokeprariyoma.

to get up, wake up; to get back up when on the ground; to fly away (a bird); to manifest suddenly, to declare; to be expelled (a pathogenic being or substance, out of a sick person. hokeprou.

son-in-law, you must enlarge the hole. shoape wa the ka ha premarini.

you must enlarge the hole. premarini.

to be generous. noshi ihita.

to begin to paint crosses on oneself. yakiraprou.

to become stiff, to stiffen (under the effect of an effort). hirara.

shotgun (archaism). ãrekerimi.

the fire is extinguished. koa wake misi ãkikiwe.

tight, narrow. wãkikiwe.

to be extinguished (a fire), to be tight/narrow. ãkikiwe.

to make someone scream in terror. eaimomarei.

he took the woman by the arm in turn and made love silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to make love (said by a man, jokingly). nihoronihoromou.

the Woman-toucan with the pubis pululant with lice. ei mayepiriyoma pe weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

toucan. mayepu.

I am hungry. pishã ãsi heã.

to be hungry. pishã.

to be completely flared out towards the edge. ehetewe.

my daughter, the daughter of my brother (said by a man), the daughter of my sister (said by a woman). theeye.

to have become shaky. hãwekeã.

to be angry. pakiko.

to slide the hair between the fingers to remove lice, pulling gently. fnoma ikokai.

to kill lice with the teeth. fnoma oai.

to sharpen two utensils by rubbing blade against blade. namo yakekeai.

to remove lice. fnoma.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

1. To make someone absorb a malefic substance (h e r i) by mixing it with food; to feed a hekura by offering ami u. 2. To take medication orally (neol.). koamarei.

I already have irritated skin from the heat. ya si fraai re waikipe.

to have irritated skin from being too close to a fire. waikipe.

if you move like that, the humans will hear you and shoot you with arrows. mi naha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

to kill by shooting arrows or firing a gun. niyaprarei.

in an instant we went to get wood, then I quickly went to gather the leaves (that I needed to cover the roof of my shelter). yetu yama the ãshope ha pathothani, yetu yãã re ya henaki perema.

to work together; to exchange goods (during a trade). ãshope.

to let ripen. fetema.

to let ripen, to allow to ripen. fetema.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) for a moment to look for something underneath them. hãshãetai.

ay, our voices sink (= slip) under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

the turtle retracted its head (inside its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

to slip inside, to slide along, to slip through the hands, to sink. wahoai.

Are you still a good shooter. wa nihite ha shoaa.

to be a good hunter/shooter. shoaa.

they kicked the excrement. kohoromi shipe kayoamahe.

they kicked. kayoamahe.

he tied the two gallinetas (birds) together and carried them on his back. hãshimo ke kipi parekerema.

to tie two long objects together and carry them on one. parekerema.

to incline or make decline (a celestial body in mythology). kaimakei.

Siroromi desolló al hombre que chillaba en vano de dolor. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to whine insistently (a child). miyomo.

to make spin. hiyãhiãi.

a locative or directional form. ku-ra-ti.

to be full of moisture (wood), object damaged by moisture and decomposition. ruthe.

yo boto las deyecciones de las abejas. pei ke ya shi pe hoyai kupe.

excrement of bees. shipe.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pata prariroma.

to become extensive, to enlarge, to expand. prauku.

(esp. bocón). pokou.

I persist, I do not take it into account. ya nape he prakehea ha totihiikuni.

to persist, to insist, to be obstinate. prakehea.

I went on foot (not in a canoe). washiti ha ya huma.

on firm ground, outside of water; by land (not in a canoe). fwashiti.

stay still (stop touching everything). hurii ayatou mai.

to rub, to touch, to take without asking. hurihi.

to be in a hurry. prohoro.

to be locally wrinkled, crumpled or soft. wãpreteã.

to rise (the day, second stage). uhehou.

stubbornness, obstinacy. yatiwe.

to bend or fold me. mi itutu.

raised leaves. posusuwe.

he abandons what he is doing repeatedly. a shiro huhehou.

to repeat, to do repeatedly. huhehou.

dawn is breaking. mi ukekeai.

to dawn, to break (of day). ukeke.

it was a jaguar (lit. ira yai a kuoma, pei orahi ha hiima a rukepoma.

1. To keep an object hooked or hung. 2. To carry on the shoulder, around the neck or on the nape. rukepou.

not to fear exposing oneself to arrows, to face someone with the challenge of carrying out a threat (of shooting an arrow at the speaker). niyãpramou.

Please, here we have to start being prudent. heha re pe ta moyawetaru she e.

to become prudent, attentive (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). moyawerayou.

without losing an instant Toucan leaned his arrows. mayepirithawe shereka ke ki rakitaa ha yaimakini (mit.

his arrows. yaimakini.

the man had mixed with the dense group of winged termites, he had. mi ãmo totihi ha (mit.

the voice of the ancestor came out from the bottom of the burrow (saying): "come get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni: "ware ta koreyo. ". ".

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs. -paru.

The bark of the ayukuma tree peels off easily. ayukuma a si poshowe.

1. To have multiple blisters. 2. To peel off easily (skin, bark). poshowe.

to sting (a mosquito or insect). hiii.

fact of few of its inhabitants (dwelling, camp: often in the morning, due to tasks in the conuco or in the forest). mathokopramai.

to paint oneself with several circles on the body. tipikamorayou.

to become unconscious, to faint, to be breathless after a shock. pekohomo.

habitually blows a cool breeze (in the morning, before dawn). fwahari a phouo tharei.

habitually blows a cool breeze (in the morning, before dawn). phou.

the white arrows of the chupacacao bird. herãmi pe sherekapi au.

white, clean. herãmi.

that can be cut or torn lengthwise. sheriramou.

the light of the glowworm or firefly, its phosphorescence. famakuri wake.

Amakurithawe has just set fire to the magical substances. amakurithaweni heri ke ki wake re piyemaparihe (cha.

glowworm; firefly. famakuri.

to tense the string of a bow by twisting it on itself. hãto nahitha erekeai.

to tense the string of a bow by twisting it on itself. hãto nahitha ereke.

to shiver; to tremble with fever; to have convulsions. huu.

by means of what. weti ke theni.

by means of what, through what. theni.

I approach the shore. ya katio.

to approach the shore. katio.

that the ones who put feathers of birds of prey in the lobes of their ears come. pe no koikoimipi hena huuhou ta kuikiyo.

ones who put feathers of birds of prey in the lobes of their ears. koikoimipi.

to make a cotton ball smaller by using its thread. ãkropramai.

they botched many goods. matohi pruka a hoyamahe.

they botched. hoyamahe.

to let vegetation invade a path. wãkereãmai.

to be impassive, stoic (in relation to pain, danger); not to show sadness during mourning. puhi rohothoo.

to endure, to resist, to withstand. ohotho.

the two shapono (baskets) are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the ancestor Monos capuchinos were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to be placed or located one next to the other (for low, rounded objects). tipete.

to cause the surface of the water to tremble. rahurahumomai.

the doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to give many injections to someone during a medical treatment (neologism); to shoot many times at a target when practicing with a bow (jokingly). tereshãpraheni.

to massage oneself (to relieve a hutuka). hutete.

tree that has slid on its stump without falling. fhi tihea.

tree that slides on its stump without falling after being cut (usually gets caught on other trees). tihei.

the shaman removes the evil from the body of the sick person and sends it underground. the ki wayu hayurema, peithe hami the ki keamai.

to take, obtain by taking off. hayurei.

there is a wide open space (in the middle of the vegetation). the ka yakeo prahawe.

we left the arrow canes (to dry in the sun) in a place where the trees left a piece of sky uncovered. the misi ka yakeo kuope ha yama pe shereka ropramai.

to slide through vegetation. yakekei.

to be naturally in tension. fririhiwe.

—Brother-in-law, is that really you. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe. —Yes, it's really me. —awei ke, kamiye ke.

to clean, to tidy up, to paint or color white; to let something whiten. aumai.

the bees have stung me so much that my scalp hurts. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to kill a good hunter of giant cachicamos (during a ceremonial speech). fhesiki k u s h e a i.

skull, cranium; shell (of a turtle, crab, cachicamo). fhesiki.

the tip of the vine forms a hook. thoo thotho ishakoa.

Squirrel retook breath in a vine that hung in the shape of a curl. maari ke thothoku tishokoope ha, wayapashiriwe ke a wãri wãshimi horuma.

to curve, to bend into a hook shape. ishakoa.

he slid his hand along the strings of the hammock. pei re the pe peki hami imiki waroroataroma.

to slide one. waroroataroma.

if you irritate me, I will retrace my steps. wa no hushuai ha ya he tatorayou.

to turn back, to retrace one. tatorayou.

thanks to the soap, no doubt it will become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to become clean/white (perfective, plural object). aurariyo.

to let spoil, to let damage. wãrimoraV.

to be loose, slack. prihã.

he placed it on the ground, in the place where the cassava dough was drying. nashi hipe re makepe ha a prakema.

to place on top of something. makepe.

to be completely rolled up in a spiral; to be folded over itself several times. yapurerayou.

desató rápidamente el chinchorro de bejucos (colgado de las ramas de un árbol), lo amarró (para transportarlo), y luego bajó. thoo thoku re kushetareiwei, thoku ha okãprarini a ithorayoma.

desató rápidamente. kushetareiwei.

the two red partridges gathered a cooked curled-up caterpillar. pokorami ke kipini kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepirema.

they two (he and she). hokepirema.

caterpillar, larva. purima.

at dawn they offered food baskets, they offered baskets full of momo fruits. the pe ni ithãprayou ha henaponi, momo ke a ithãprai ha kuparuheni.

to offer food baskets. henaponi.

hard objects. yakekai.

to solidify (something that is liquid). hihumarei.

who has wanted to kill us then. weti ke pe ihirupi wãri perihiweni wa ãhuku kãi niya thai ta kutuhe.

to kill someone. perihiweni.

to hang upside down (perfective form). ihohoray.

we approached and got down to the river. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

to descend, to get down (from a canoe). ithoprapariyo.

he unraveled some fibers from the end of his hammock (and said): "Mother-in-law. thoo thoku he kushesheprai ha shoaroni.

to unravel, untwist, unthread, fray. kushesheai.

to fall to the ground (without realizing it, often due to the effect of a hallucinogen). praariyo.

a cultivated plant; Justicia sp. (Acanthaceae), used as a hallucinogen, alone or mixed with other substances. shãri.

to be at a higher level, to put above. yutehe.

high, elevated. rapa.

to have a side. wereheai.

I was blocked by a deep river. mãu u oki ha ya shi wãrioma.

I left my arrow there where it was (in a tree where the speaker could not go get it). shereka ya shi wãrimakema.

to block, to obstruct. wãriãmai.

to rise up, come off (skin of a smoked fish). proprokoai.

to dig shallow holes (durative or plural object). maketimai.

to start clearing the ground, to start cleaning it, to start leaving it clean. takakaprai.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

put on. tikrohai.

to have been grated (cassava). hirika no.

I first caught the fish by shooting them with arrows, then I killed them with a machete. sherekani yuri ya pe tiwehai parioma, siparani ya pe tuyei mahioma.

then, after that. mahioma.

I have left doing it for a long time. yetu ha ya huheprariyoma.

I have abandoned/left it definitively. huheprariyoma.

immediately. hei tehe shoawe.

sit immediately in the canoe. kanawa a hami wamaki komi tikekea ha shoaparuni.

don't run away immediately. rerei shoatou mai.

father-in-law, put your axe on your shoulders immediately (= take your axe immediately). shoape, hãyokoma a ta rukea shoawe.

to do immediately, to do without waiting, to do quickly, to do together, to do at the same time. shoatou.

mix. konimai.

(synonym). hãto nahi.

tomaré bienes solamente una. mori totihiwe ke ya yuape, ya nakou kotãope mai.

one; singular. yuape.

to take out food in the indicated manner; to offer (during a ceremonial dialogue). fni hikei.

to take, to remove. yake.

imitate Rashakami. rashakami a ta oweprari.

you have to do like the Shamathari. shamathari wa pe ha owemani.

to imitate, to act like. oweprai.

as it was night, those who went hunting shouted to be fetched. the pe rãmi re huonowei, the mi ka supre ha:"wamare ta koreyo she", pe komima.

it is night, it is dark. supre ha.

I cannot walk fast when the pain in my thigh becomes more intense. naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

pain. wakusi.

to grab by the shoulders, to hold by the shoulders. hãkihio.

to silently invite someone from a distance by articulating the lips without making any sound, often for a romantic rendezvous. wahatokei.

they (both) answered twice. the kipi ã hua re porakarayouwei.

put both hands, it's a boy (who is going to be born), the mother is feeling it. pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke e yaro, a wã wapai re kure (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

1. To occur twice. 2. To start working in pairs.. porakaprou.

to tie, to bind tightly with a knot or very tight loop. prohohoray.

to solidify (something that is liquid). hihumarei.

without delay Toucan propped up his arrows. mayepirithawe shereka ke ki rakitaa ha yaimakini.

to lean against, to prop up. rakitaa.

to feel bad. he opikewemi.

to feel bad. opikewemi.

he is lazy. a mohi.

I'm starting to get tired (the speaker is in a tree). ya mohiãi ke a re kupiyeheri.

lazy, tired of, reluctant. mohi.

supernatural being associated with premonitory dreams. thapiriwe.

rara. hakamisi.

the woman hung from a tree and, when Danta passed underneath, she kicked him. hii ke hi kuope ha suwe a ha yautaruni shamariwe ke a pata pepihitou tehe, suweni a kahathorema (mit.

to lie in a hammock hung below another, to sleep several times in a row in a hammock placed below another (e.g. during a move), to get under. pepitou.

I stepped right on top of a snake lying on the ground. oru ke ki praope ha ya ki poushoku re katikireiwei.

I jumped over a puddle, and went and fell right on top of a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki pesheku re katikireiwei.

to fall or step right on top of something (e.g. a snake). katikireiwei.

to dye red, to make something red. iye hãroko.

at that point Barba blanca (nickname) leaves to attack the enemy shamans. kaweiki aumani hekura pe shurukai mi hua re shoarayoheriiwei.

to attack. aumani.

to separate into several groups when walking through the forest, to separate so that each one lives on their own. sherereprou.

to be good. hosho nou.

to be. nou.

signal of the giant anteater. rekerimi siki.

giant anteater. rekerimi.

the dog was named Tokorinawe, it was very big. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

having the name Tokorinawe. tokorinawe.

rolled and kneaded cassava dough to be dried over the fire. kohipe.

there live the aggressive omãyãri. kihi omãyãri ke pe re waitheripe.

to make his path unrecognizable (impassable). waitheripe.

the hallucinogens are mixed (= it is a mixture of hallucinogens). epena pe heshihiwe.

to mix, blend. kone.

immediately she rubbed against him, and she insulted him. e mãririãprarou ha shoaparuni, suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma.

to insult, to offend by publicly proclaiming someone. suweni.

he is beautifully painted with sinuous lines that go down his whole body. the oni torerewe riyehewe.

to be painted with sinuous lines that go down the whole body. torere.

they hurried to shave the old woman's head, and then they threw her into the water. patayoma the he shi hariwe hopaheni, a sheyepareihe.

they threw her into the water. sheyepareihe.

sister, come closer. amiye, wa ha aheteikiyoni.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

approach a danger without realizing it. aheteariyo.

approach. aheteikiyoni.

to become longer than. rapahaprou.

to stir (something) once. tikoreai kukei.

to stir, to mix, to agitate. tikore.

portion of liver. ãmo.

I am afraid. hiihami mohi.

to be afraid. hiihami.

we passed in front of the abandoned camp's shelters. yamaki ha ukuukuikuni, payepayekepokirioma, ai e nahi wãri (habla del sur del Orinoco.

refugios. parokini.

it served no purpose that the mother kept her daughter well seated on the edge of the hammock. pe niini pe thee ke a hore tipemapou re aheteonowei.

it served no purpose. aheteonowei.

ritual of alliance between two or more communities, which consists of scattering the embers and lit ashes of the domestic fires, throwing them at each other and throwing themselves to the ground, to demonstrate their valor. hãohãomayou.

no metas nada más (en la cesta), está repleta. kui ha wa thaprai mai, pe the hishiki.

to be full, crammed. hishiki.

we set out, we got going. yamaki ha huroherini.

to go, to walk, to move. huro.

(mit. yeture e the mi pata titi yopramai ha shoaroherini.

the deployment/spread of night. shoaroherini.

short. foikosi.

he will not accept sending the woman to have sex. suwe a noshi imãrei.

to refuse to give an object; to refuse to send a woman to have sex; to refuse to entrust a baby to someone else. imãrei.

the people upriver wear such narrow loincloths that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

to protrude on both sides. rapoheni.

it just passed behind Mount Teriope. teriope ke ki hami a ãyorii kuhe (mit.

to put behind, to put towards the back; to pass behind. ãyoriãi.

to fall ill (and due to this disrupt the course of one. yapekeprou.

the amo of the movable lands approached me (with a determined purpose). wareriarriba.

to become dark (visibility). rumãhãtou.

I will stain you with excrement. pe shiipimarei.

excrement. shiipimarei.

let the children stay here wallowing in the mud. ihiru ke the pe wai sheyeo heai.

1. To throw oneself to the ground, wallow in mud or sand; to launch at full speed. 2. To sow by throwing grains; to throw an object to someone to give it to them; to violently throw an object to break it.. sheye.

ay, our voices sink (= slip) under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

the turtle retracted its head (inside its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

to slip inside, to slide along, to slip through the hands, to sink. wahoai.

give them food (ceremonial dialogue). ke ki ni ta hikãhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to feed (a very small child by chewing food and giving it mouth-to-mouth); to feed (jokingly, during a ceremonial speech). hikãrei.

to reach a summit or ridge. atotokei.

retorcer la cuerda de un arco haciéndola girar sobre el muslo con la palma de la mano (en el momento de la fabricación). hãto nahitha prikiprikiai.

twist the bowstring by rolling it over the thigh with the palm of the hand (during the manufacturing process). prikiprikiai.

I am looking for them (while moving). ya pe taeaprarai.

he was advancing, cutting the vegetation and leveling the ground. enaha re e the pe peaprarai kuaama, e the hoãprarai kuaama.

to continue doing something while moving. aprara.

evidential marker indicating inference based on results. -rayoi.

to be scratched, to be hurt. yaheprou.

the great jejenes exterminated the Yanomami, they ate them all. peti nakini yãse nomãmi the ki waa hititiararema, the ki haikiprarema.

to receive something from someone in its entirety. yãse.

¡se le parecía mucho. a no wãi hore shomipi ha ke.

different. shomipi.

I don't have a quid of tobacco under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a quid of tobacco under the upper lip. hiiai.

I am afraid. miorewe ke ki.

to be afraid. miorewe.

he got caught in the rain. he maapirayou.

to get caught in the rain. maapirayou.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. hãihãiyomi natha hi.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. hãihãiyomi.

my hammock is constantly being lifted up (by the hekura spirits). ya peki yepiyepiwe.

my hammock is constantly being lifted up (by the hekura spirits). yepiyepiwe.

to be in a big hurry. shãkãshãkã nathoku.

to be in a hurry. nathoku.

your bodies do not give off the odor of onoto. nana wama e ki ni patheo ma re maohe ke.

exhale, give off (odor). patheo.

what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me. kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by pulling with the hand, exerting lateral pressure). hoyorarei.

to break into several pieces. yahekirariyo.

tree (unidentified). hapakawe.

when the celestial disk broke, the ancestors ran to take refuge in the cacao trees. tu misi keprou tehe pohoroa ana hiki upraope ha poreri ke pe re pririkeiwei.

celestial disk. misi.

you know very well that it (the tobacco) does not dry fast. the pe kãi ma re heprao haio mai: sabes muy bien que no se seca rápido (el tabaco).

dry. seca.

low, near the ground. fyahatoto yape.

low, near the ground. fyahatoto.

give something to someone completely, receive something from someone completely. hai!.

catch fish. koapra.

to be in a state of being. potetou.

to loosen, to make looser. hihoamai.

return. fpeki.

to limp, to hobble. tiyerii.

to crumple or dent multiple objects. wãikirariyo.

I was stung by a twenty-four without realizing it. shihoni ware the tikai totihionoma.

twenty-four. shihoni.

short, not wide (tying from which something hangs, carrying strap). usutua.

drink it. a ta koari.

drink it. koari.

he/she died. a nohi mohoturayoma.

they died. mohoturariyoma.

to begin shaving someone. mãrokoshiprai.

they constructed a scaffolding around (the rock). the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

to perforate, to make a hole. shokei.

the pain prevented him from moving. no wãri kiwema mai.

to prevent from moving. kiwema.

they climbed (the mountain) and Kasimi felt vertigo. pe ha yãmothoni kasimi a shi kirihotayoma.

to climb (a mountain). yãmothoni.

to stain something in a place. hayapishiam.

the ashes of the dead swell in the stomach (after being ingested). pei pusi hami matohi the pe hu1 sus.

I was ambushed, no one came, and a whistling call was heard. ya reoma, the pe kuproimi ha pe the pe husi heã petariyo k u r e i.

to swell, dilate. hu1.

turbid water. u koshi umoro si.

turbid, muddy (water). umoro.

to bend, to curve. hithorekei.

(to speak of upriver). sufra.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they scattered the objects, and then they scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter objects, spread them out on the ground. yapikiai.

to scratch the cavity that separates the toes of the foot by passing an object between them (a piece of wood, a cloth, etc.). kakekuai.

to cause the appearance of red spots on the skin (sun). teãyããmai.

why don't you want to give me toucan feathers. weti the ha wa ãhuku noshi imapou kure.

1. Set aside a gourd containing the crushed bones of a male relative, to consume its contents. 2. Kill a man.. ãhuku.

to rise (the day, second stage). uhehou.

fruit of the shirihari tree. shirihari.

to become shorter, to become inferior (in height, length, duration, value); to stay behind, to stay short of a limit. haweai.

the roa tree had a very comfortable protuberance (to hold on to). roa ke hi ereheã topraa totihipariyoma.

to have a protuberance, a lump, a swelling. ereheã.

(he) tied the legs of the tapir in pairs (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie the legs of an animal in pairs to carry it on the back. waremai.

piapoco or diostedé rabadilla dorada (bird species). nera.

to roll up a rope. tishoshorei.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one by which they had arrived. the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

exceed (in quantity, in length), go beyond (a limit), leave behind. tore.

I am convinced that there is really no rahara monster. rahara ke ki no wãri kuopimi ma re totihii.

not to exist, not to be (in a certain place). kuopimi.

we, the hekura dye, intend to go dance near you. wayore yama nou kãi niya re tirurorayoi.

hekura dye. wayore.

to become reddish or light red locally (of a fruit). shopokei.

the meat is on the trough without fire (and risks spoiling). wahari hami the yaro makea.

to manifest (the coolness that precedes daybreak). wahariai.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

inform, warn, advise, notify. yimirã.

to perch, to cling to or on an elongated object, to perch on a vertical surface. yetekei.

his/her brother-in-law. ouwepi.

to crease. plisarse.

we are shooting arrows at him. pema a niyapraai.

we (I and they) are at war with them. yama pe niyapraai.

to shoot arrows at, to be at war with. niyapraai.

aquí es donde apareció por primera vez. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

directional. -yoru-.

these fruits are really very sweet. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

sweet, sugary. kreteti.

the yakoana drug will make you senile. yakoana ke a wãrini wa moyepimarei.

hallucinogenic drug. yakoana.

to climb rapidly. hithehithemoherii.

ir de un fuego al otro (con frecuencia para evitar a un visitante y no ofrecerle nada). huaprarou.

hit him quickly. wai shetai.

to hit quickly. shetai.

if you refuse to do it I will throw dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to throw dirt (sand, mud) once at a person, to punish a child in that way. pahuai.

to loosen, to make a loose knot. prohororoai.

to slap each other, to confront each other by slapping on the chest or side. paiyou.

the ancestors who received the celestial disk on their heads immediately became amahiri. hetu misini no patapi pe re sheparenowei, amahiri pe kuprou shoarayoma.

ancestors who received the celestial disk on their heads and immediately became amahiri (mythical beings). amahiprou.

to move over something. eyeeyemou.

to make viscous or sticky (durative, plural object). yãrekãmai.

do not let anyone give me fishing line, share it only among yourselves. kamiye re riha matiriawe a wetimatihe, kahe wamakini ke ki wetii ta makokahe.

to give as a gift by cutting with the teeth (especially fishing line). wetimatihe.

direct line. línea directa.

to dry out. shirikiai.

the meat is tender. yaro a epehewe.

the bow is too flexible. hãto nahi a epehewe.

to be soft, tender, flexible. moroshi*.

if you insist on going you will get yourself killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini wa shemoparu.

to kill oneself. mopariyo.

don't think you can hold me immobile by grabbing me around the waist. ya wãri fãrokopouwe, a hore kutihe.

to hold a person immobile by grabbing them around the waist. hãrokopou.

in this place we (two) will make love with the women (hidden in the vegetation). ihami re pehe the he pata ohomape.

to make love (hidden in the vegetation). ohomape.

Baba kept the fire inside his mouth (to hide it). iwariweni a wake hopoma.

the shaman spat out the plant (from which a jaguar was born). hekurani ira hena hoprarema.

to vomit, to spit out, to regurgitate. wei.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

to graze, scratch, reach superficially (when shooting an arrow). tiheherema.

on the Diadema hill the big bumblebees swirl fiercely. watoshe ki hami himo ki ãiãmou yãweyãwemou tharei.

to move the head from side to side (in a sign of negation), to swirl around an axis, to spin rapidly around oneself, to make something spin with the arm, to loosen an object that is fixed to another. yãwete.

golden-headed manakin (bird species). kãrikinãmi.

while Jaguar lay on the ground with labored breathing, they (two) went back down (from the tree). irariwe ke a hethekou mao tehe, a wãri prao tehe, ke kipi hithoa ha koruni.

to breathe with difficulty (when sick, severely injured or dying). hithoa.

hurry up to grow, don't stay at home. a ta yawea ta hairi, yahi ha kuo mai ke the.

hurry up. hairi.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (talking about the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

to relax, loosen, undo. hihoprou.

to be impatient, to be in a hurry. harira.

to make a cylindrical or round object roll. yapuramai.

no doubt you all live upriver. wamaki ma re orapiyeheri.

to be located in another place (different from the place of utterance) upriver. -piyeheri.

to clean an object; to make white, to paint or color white. aushiprai.

the great rock tilted slowly. pei maki pata opi raitariyoma (mit.

the great rock tilted slowly. raitariyoma.

Rabipelado simply disappeared by behind the dwelling. nãroriwe shikã hami ke a wãri mratou re perayoherinowei.

simply disappeared. perayoherinowei.

close the mouth. kahiki ta wãsiniiku.

to close the mouth, to unite the lips. wãsini.

bone, skeleton. pasho*.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, really making me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

made (someone) stagger. atatemarei.

formed. omi: formó.

formed. omi.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

his loose teeth. ukeraruni.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, don't bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to slide multiple objects along, to make multiple objects fall out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikirãrei.

having been squeezed or pressed locally. ãhuhuã.

to remain standing for a moment. upraprao.

at the moment he turned his back, Rabipelado shot him with a blowgun dart with deadly substances. a humapi reprou tehe, protho.

to turn one. reprou.

to return on one. yapapei.

Tigana; Eurypyga helias (Eurypygidae). sheroro.

the night extended. the mi titi yopramai ha shoaroher i n i.

to extend, to spread out. shoaroher.

there are many footprints only in one place, where they broke bushes with the hand to mark their passage. hii ke hi pe re keapotayowehei pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

they broke bushes with the hand to mark their passage. keapotayowehei.

to stay up until dawn. shihihirimou.

(he) cut the umbilical cord of the baby and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

to cut a piece for oneself. hãnirei.

to grab (once) a person with all one. huweheai.

sostienen el techo de la casa de los antepasados. the ki rahakapi makekeprarou yaioma.

to hold up. makekeprarou.

there. allí.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, curling the body and taking momentum from the lower back to rise up. pushukupushukumou.

to curl up, to bend the legs against the chest. pushuku.

tobacco irritates the mouth (it has been prepared with improper ashes). pee nahe naheri.

irritating substance. naheri.

to rub with the fingertips to clean. horokorariyo.

who has inclined the palm spathe where my seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yotehea.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to disseminate, to space out (plants, animals). shororoai.

to straighten out, become rectilinear, correct oneself (terminative aspect). shaririprou.

cold, frozen. preyurapi.

when the light (of the lantern) turns red, do not believe (you two) that it will return to normal. ke ki sh wakeai kukema, ke ki sh kuprou koowe puhi kupii mai.

to believe, to think. kupii.

to undulate, to wave (surface of water) [to undulate, to wave rapidly and repeatedly]. pakayupakayumou.

they had put themselves one beside the other and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

they had put themselves one beside the other. thãriritariyoma.

on the nape of the (dead) dog there was a single tooth mark. hiima oraki ha tahiapi kanosi kuoma.

tooth mark; wound left by a bite, tooth marks on bitten food. kanosi.

to be happy, to be glad. hãshãe.

to begin carrying a child on the back, after previously carrying them on the hip (or in another way). ãyoritai.

to be thin. shipei.

some chewed leaves are scattered on the ground. yãã ke e hena wãshikã no mi tikukuwe.

to chew, masticate (durative). wãshikãi.

to cut and shape several primary remige feathers intended to form arrow fletching. heki kretitai, dur.

to have cut and shaped several primary remige feathers. heki kretitirarei, perf.

to cut and shape the primary remige feather. heki kretiti-.

to make someone commit an act, as a result of which they later feel trapped in a situation. wakewericon.

lie down next to me. a ta yakaiku.

lie down next to someone in a hammock. yakaiku.

he leaned the yagua palm stem along the tree. hii ke hi ha yei ke ãmo hiririmakema.

to lean something along. hiririmakema.

to change direction describing a curve. shokeprou.

fruits. mokaki.

to scratch oneself with. tisikamou.

Jaguar, hungry for meat, looked for it without finding it; the tapralarga (bamboo tube) to blow magical substances. ira a naikiripi taema ma kui, a tapralarga nomi.

a hollow plant stem with transverse partitions like bamboo, used by shamans to blow magical substances at adversaries. tapralarga.

the pain prevents me from moving. no wãri kiwema mai.

it prevents me from moving. kuaapimi.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

to stretch out (a line of people walking through the forest), to fell several trees on the same side in order to make a larger tree fall on them, to be elevated above. yashok.

to float. karoroai.

on each occasion the ancestors let the otter escape. no patapi peni proro re pe tokupraamanowehei.

1. Let escape, put to flight (animals, enemies), let a fish escape; allow someone to flee, help someone to flee; run away with a woman [tokuamai: facilitate the escape of many people]. 2. Let die [tokumarei, perf.]. tokumai.

I descended the other slope. ya mohe hotepariyoma.

descended the other slope. hotepariyoma.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoik u.

to embrace, to hug. waporoai.

I offer many objects. hipi tikreai.

offer many objects. tikre.

to intentionally break a long and rigid object by stepping on it. kahekikei.

(speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). ishinapemi.

the river is rising. u petii.

filled; satiated; swollen (river). petirariyo.

they (the two) took her, placed themselves on each side and carried her slowly to solid ground. opi a kãi re washiripikeiwei.

they (the two) took her, placed themselves on each side and carried her slowly to solid ground. washiripikeiwei.

Hurry up and go down. pe ithoai ta haitaru: apúrense a bajar.

Go around and also it can be The word 'ru' in Yanomami means 'to steal'. a ta ãyoru: haz un rodeo.

perfective verbal suffix. ru.

to cut in a circular manner, remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object (durative, plural object). shimonenemai.

He harvests the kahu tree fruits. Uu hiyeai kahu wake.

to harvest fruits using a long pole with a narrow fork at the end. hiyeai.

Ouch!. haso!.

there were mosquitos (supernatural) at the waterfall and they were seated. yawaramapiwei a pora ha peti naki rooma.

they were seated. aramapiwei.

the hekura prepare magical substances. hekura peni heri a kopematurahe ke.

prepare magical substances. kopematurahe.

the smoke (of the cigarette) is swallowed easily. the wake shi suhao totihit a w e.

to swallow. suhao.

it is here where the disease demon has been secured (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to tie tightly with many turns, to secure solidly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. hateta.

to become sticky or viscous. yãrekãi.

to damage by anger the roof of a dwelling by striking it with a machete or stabbing it with a knife (the blow is struck obliquely in relation to the general orientation of the petioles of the leaves that serve as cover). pakekeai.

the noise made by arrows being shot. taki.

I was so angry that I sat for a long time. ya hushuopi kãi rotaoma.

the (bird) stayed seated in the same place for a long time, in plain sight. wa weto ha ke the pata rotaoma.

to sit, to be seated. rotaoma.

who has wanted to kill us then. weti ke pe ihirupi wãri perihiweni wa ãhuku kãi niya thai ta kutuhe.

to kill. kutuhe.

to take possession of a woman without the consent of her parents; to tell a community to take possession of a woman. tushuai.

to close one eye. ãsitou.

to shoot with a shotgun (neologism). tãiprai.

I approached him (to kill him) at a moment when his wife was distracted. pe suwepi a wãri mohotutio totihio tehe ya prakea totihikeyoruma.

to approach quickly a person (usually to attack them). praketakei.

the canoe is corroded in parts by rot. kanawa a rep i s i.

to become thin, to be corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisii.

perfective inceptive of . hoterayou.

to be brittle. yeririwe.

I shot an arrow without a tip at him. shereka proke makasini ya the niyaprarema.

arrow with the tip removed (to kill small game, to play shooting arrows at each other). makasini.

white, crystalline, more or less translucent stone. kakuruma.

to clean the soles of the feet by rubbing them against something; to scratch the feet by rubbing them against something; to scratch the cavity between the toes by passing an object through it. kakeku.

dry. weheprawe.

moriche palm. Mauritia.

he will give me a piece of his lechosa and also it can be The word 'shamakoro' in Yanomami means 'tobacco (synonym of shama)'. shamakoro a hakokopei.

lechosa (type of fruit). shamakoro.

I am worried, there are not enough cooked plantains and there are only two small bunches left in the field. ya puhi ma re horihitou totihirohe, roshi the no wãi kuprou totihiopi mai, porakapi the kipi wai onohowe yaua kupiyekiri.

to be disconcerted, stunned; to be helpless. horihiprou.

I don. reheru.

striped catfish; Pseudoplatystoma fasciatum and P. araremi: Zool. Tigrinum (Pimelodidae). , pez, bagre rayado; Pseudoplatystoma fasciatum y P.

striped catfish. araremi.

1. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tiresha.

to be locally damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekehou.

to soften (the ground), to become muddy. kaweheai.

edible fruit of the kãyuweshirimi hi tree; Herrania lemniscata (Sterculiaceae). mãroweshi.

the corn began to sprout in a vast area. yono mo haa aka praukua re shoarayoheriiwei (mit.

to begin to grow/sprout in a vast area. shoarayoheriiwei.

he gave the turn to the dwelling, examining all the hearths. orea ha hititiapotuni.

examining all. hititiapotuni.

he was wearing blue cotinga feather earrings. heimi siki reikimapoma.

to put/place in a suspended state in the void. reikikei.

to emerge, come out. ureprou.

they passed the tobacco rapidly with negligence through the ashes (to prepare a chew). oi ya he pehi kãi papasaron rápido con negligencia el tabaco por la shokai ma kure.

to pass rapidly with negligence. tapranomi.

enter silbando (whistling) into a dwelling (a visitor). koikoimou.

your wives deny you tobacco and keep you in need of it. suwepihe pe shi ha imaoni pee ke wama nahe pe ha horipoheni.

to keep someone in a state of need or deprivation. horipoheni.

The jaguar, carrying the dog on its neck, was completely alike. téntico jaguar, cargaba al perro sobre el cuello.

to be completely alike, to resemble like two drops of water. yaipimi.

mientras él estaba colgado cabeza abajo de un algarrobo aislado, Osa hormiguera daba vueltas alrededor de la plaza central de la casa. ãro yawerewe kohi ha a mi wereo tehe, teperiyoma a rii tiwaroa shoarayoama.

Osa hormiguera daba vueltas alrededor de la plaza central de la casa. shoarayoama.

he was carrying green plantains hanging from a vine, and on top he had placed ripe ones. atha ke ki rukeka no yehipoma, heaka hami wake the ki makepom a.

1. To hook, to get entangled. 2. To detect a very faint sound.. ruke.

he arrived at the place where the termites were standing, with their heads covered in white down. osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

they were standing. uprahaope.

they killed my male relative, they made him disappear (speech from upriver). ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

man (lit.: a bamboo arrowhead fell). Euphemism used to announce the death of a man.. hena*.

Sorocuá cola blanca went to search for the product of the hunt. kurekurethaweni yaro re a koãi mi ukukema (mit.

to go to search for the product of the hunt. kurekurethaweni.

I am the Spider-spirit hanging upside down (on the web). hãhãrãmãethawe ya ihohoa kuyahi (cha.

He came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi (mit.

spider. kuyahi.

on the ridge. fmatoto hami.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. fmatotowe yo.

ridge, top of a mountain. fmatoto.

a rare and little-known animal, possibly a feline or a mythological being that is said to attack humans. huhu.

to have two oblique lines crossed on the nose, to be painted in that way. rakirakei.

(he/she/it) runs. rerei.

to run. erei.

she realized that all she had was coal in her hand. oshohore wa ki mãopou ta no hoopereshini (mit.

1. To carry in the arms and against the chest. 2. To carry in balance on the shoulder (long object). mãopou.

the son of Õmawe got bloated from drinking so much water. omawe e ihirupi amishi koo tehe mãu uni a thororoprariyoma.

I filled their lungs with water and drowned them (the hekura), aren't they floating. mãu u ha ya mishi kãi ha tuparuni ya pe mishi ha tumaparini, pe karorowe ma kui.

water. mãu.

I am angry. wãyoãpi ke ya.

to be angry. wãyoãpi.

to bend a finger. fi m ihena shãkoãi.

to bend a finger. shãkoãi.

to clap the hands together. fimiki pohopohomou.

to clap the hands together. pohopohomou.

I put my foot in the middle of a snake lying on the ground. oru ke ki praope ha ya ki poushoku re katikireiwei.

tie a bark strap around my mother's waist and take her by the arm (to guide her). naye wama poushoku ha okãkini a wãri ta ipipahe.

middle, waist, kidneys. fpoushoku.

go there (you two) to prepare seje drink. hoko mãu pe ta yarupikutu.

come (both of you) to drink here. the ta koapiyo.

they (two). pi.

material. materia.

we two are dirty (he and I). kamiye yaheki shapehekini pehe pe niyapraama.

we two are dirty. shapehekini.

a man has died. ãtãri ãhi kerayoma.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantities. yatehai.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal or plant). proromi.

we eat the honey and then we go on our way. puu yama upe ha koararini yamaki kurayoheriiwei.

we go on our way. koararini.

to be a little soft. fepehehe.

come little one, lick my fingers. hapo, pusi, yare imiki nakoape.

to lick. nako.

to have the forehead painted with a curved line that goes from one ear to the other. tishore.

to make do or allow to do something in a certain place; to make put something or someone in a certain position. taamake.

Taste of a liquid. koa.

to be separated, to live in different communities. pashihou.

I used to dock at a place where the vegetation was sparse. u nokare wawepohori ha ya katioma.

shore, bank, edge. nokare.

to move by jumping, as frogs do. yutuprakei.

that which is heard is the beating of a hummingbird's wings. tesho hakora siki horã.

feathers that are found under the wing (more specifically: white feathers that are found on the underside of the razor-billed curassow; these feathers are used in male ornamentation). fakora.

tomorrow you all will have fun. henaha ke wamaki iriamope.

you all will have fun. iriamope.

parrot. weheri.

Don't insist on repeating that, that's what I'm saying. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

1. To not change one. wã he yati.

to become bitter. koãmiãi.

the man had just become initiated as a shaman, he arrived where the termites with white plumes on their heads were standing. yãnomãmi thaamamo no tute ke the, osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

to become initiated as a shaman. thaamamo.

the burning breath of the prey-diadem spreads over us. watoshe koimari a no heyoshi re pakayuope ye e.

to propagate, to spread out (wind, water). pakayuope.

in his house I hung my hammock in the direction of the central plaza of the dwelling (from the lower to the upper part of the roof of the dwelling). kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

to hang. tou.

they live on the other side of the mountain. hehu a yapuru hami pe peria.

on the other side, over the other slope (of an elevation of terrain). fyapuru.

I did not eat much honey, I was dipping something in it for a moment to eat it and then someone called me to go. puu ya u pe wai he ononoo mai, wãisipi ya the wai ha otoototaakini, ai theni yare nakama.

to dip a food in a liquid quickly to eat it. otootomai.

stay calm, don't steal, I won't stop prohibiting you (from bothering others). huritihehe, huritihehe, kiha ya wã no wasio kuyeheo mai ke the.

to prohibit someone from doing something, to indicate with a hand gesture from afar for someone not to go or not to do what they intend to do. wasio.

I'm going to give you a blow on the head. pe he yokepei.

to give someone a blow on the head. yokepei.

and if I transfer it to another pot. ai shomi ke si hami ya the ki ha heikini.

to transfer, to pour from one container to another. heiai.

to compress, to curl up. hikoãi.

make the hearths be placed one after the other, as they were before. mihami re nahi he tikeamai ta kooimahe.

to place elongated objects one after the other, to put one after the other (durative, plural object). tikemai.

the pava rajadora was on the top of the tree (and was not visible). mãrãshi a yaokokema.

to be on the top of a tree or branch across a dense space and, for this reason, not be visible from below. yaokokema.

brother-in-law, did you already eat the wapu fruits that we (you and I) prepared. shori, wapu pehe ki re thaperei, wa ki waa waikirema.

we (you and I) prepared. waikirema.

to start braiding, to start interweaving fibers. kapirosiprai.

to collapse, to crumble. hishishiai.

medicine. korukoru.

do not group together. pe tishoshatihe.

a large number of termites swarmed in the water. mãu u hami komi konaki tishoshama.

compact group. tishoshorayou.

cut the vine (in two). thoo thotho ta peprari.

I harvested leaves counting them (the petiole). yãã ya henaki perema.

they chopped off the jaguar's head. ira pe he kãi peremahe (mit.

to cut, to chop off a piece of something (a long object, applying blows from above downwards, or oblique). peararei.

we have surrounded the collective dwelling. shapono yama a he hithorokopema.

1. Construct a dwelling with a circular roof in one piece. 2. Fence, surround a dwelling or a person. ithorokopei.

characterized by getting angry easily: he. yãpiriwe: hekura.

characterized by getting angry easily. yãpiriwe.

displace yourselves in a line (and silently), like the chachacos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to line up, to be aligned. shaninio.

Baba could not contain (the laughter) any longer, he spat out the beautiful fire. iwariwe ke a puhi reprou ha maparuni, kai ke wake pata riyehewe hoprarema.

I spat it out. ya the hoprarema.

to spit, to regurgitate. hoprarema.

to receive little, to disappoint someone. waipei.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

May the messenger of the feast arrive soon. teshomopi a koã ta haipo.

messenger. teshomopi.

to suck in (the flesh of a fish bone, the marrow of a bone, the juice of a sugar cane, etc.). ususuai.

he hit it with his machete against the rock, and the pieces flew away. maa ma pe ha sipara a ha tihekikini, the nikashi yuturayoma.

I jumped over a puddle, and I fell right on top of a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki pesheku re katikireiwei.

to be projected (with a certain degree of force or violence); to jump, to leap from branch to branch (a bird, a monkey, etc.). tihekikini.

certainly we will go to war with you. pemaki niyape ke.

to go to war, to fight. niyape.

it is your arrow. sherekahe ke a.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

stay sleeping while they make love with your wife. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo (mit.

your (2nd person singular). sherekahe.

to extend horizontally; to extend a liana from one bank to another of a stream (in order to cross it, holding onto it). kareremai.

Tucán flew in turn towards the broken liana that was still swinging, and clung to it. thotho yãteyãtemou shoao tehe mayepirithawe a yeteprapariyoma.

he clung to it. yeteprapariyoma.

they already have all their noses broken. the pe hiyoka si hetitia waikirariyouwei.

to have a broken nose. hetitia.

to curve an object, give it the shape of an arc. payokokei.

this has the smell of a capuchin monkey. the ni kurisipisini.

having the characteristic smell of (something). kurisipisini.

the man was lying in his hammock fixing arrow featherings. yãnomãmi shereka a he haomai kãi peritioma.

lying in a hammock. peritioma.

por más que tú pienses "yo tengo un viejo fusil remendado con un alambre". hei kopetaye ya wãri ãrãprepi ta thaporani.

wire. thaporani.

to consume a large amount of banana puree. kuratha u preai.

to consume a lot of. u preai.

to become short. homotou.

also the women scratch themselves with a sharp stick during the ritual of their first menstruation. suwe pe yipimou tehe pe kãi hãsikou.

ritual of a girl. unokãimou.

to start closing a basket by bringing the opposite edges together and tying them. itutuprai.

I was convinced that a snake was going to bite me and I walked with apprehension. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to walk with apprehension or worry. haruaprarou.

The wood split longitudinally. Wake eriri ama.

to split longitudinally. eriri.

when I have departed, that fire will make them suffer (they will be incinerated in it when they die). ihi wake ha wama nini preai hoowe.

when, while. hoowe.

(speaks of upriver). pukatu.

to present one. hesika rea.

que vengan (los hekura) que se ponen plumas de aves de rapiña en el lóbulo de sus orejas. pe no koikoimipi hena huuhou ta kuikiyo.

to insert something into the earlobe. huuhou.

to produce pots (durative 2). turerou.

The woman became sterile due to the effect of manaka plant. Mujer manakapiarayou por efecto de manaka ke ki.

to become sterile. manakapiai.

to hang upside down (perfective form). ihohokei.

to sink, to crumble, to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihoai.

to help. thãrima.

the child is afraid. hokotomari uthãhi.

to be afraid. uthãhi.

to make the noise that a taut string makes when vibrating. pãopãomo.

they shot numerous arrows and the noise they made when falling was heard. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

noise produced by numerous arrows falling to the ground. thohuthohumorurei.

the chicken ran with its wings extended. kakara ihirupi hehewe a rereapraroma.

to have wings extended. rerehe.

to move away a little, to move aside. tikukutou.

the monkeys chillered in pain when they inserted their penis, and the fish cut it off. titiri pe mo tititou tehe yuri peni pe mo ha wetirini, pe rããmoma.

a mythological figure. titiri.

he opened his hammock (hung it) and lay down. yii keki a ha kusherini a perioma.

he is lying in a cotton hammock. yii ke ki ha a peria kure.

cotton hammock. yiiye.

he sent Arrendajo (to harvest fruits). ãyãkorãriwe a shimirema (mit.

to send someone to do something; to send something to someone. shimirema.

everyone left, they abandoned the dwelling. pe komi hua shoarayoma, pe no rii maprou re shoarayouwei.

the children disappeared immediately. ihiru pe no mraa re shoatareiwei.

to go away, to abandon the communal dwelling. mapr.

during clearing, to fell several trees on the same side so that they fall with the fall of a thicker tree. pakakuamai.

to drag, to pull, to haul, to drag something in a fall. pakakuai.

to improve a little (same inflections). wahuhu.

to improve a little. wahuhu.

to crumple or dent multiple objects. wãikirariyo.

woodpecker. Picidae.

1. to crawl, walk crouched; 2. to habitually obtain goods from a particular person or community. tereke.

smoke rising inside a dwelling. koa wake shi poyakaai.

smoke rising inside a dwelling. poyakaai.

(in a myth): they were already hanging by their arms, the ancestors had turned into sloths. the pe yakukuprawe waikiwe ha, poreri ke the ihamarariyoma.

to hang or be hanging by the arms; to be hanging by arms and legs with the head down (like sloths), to hang with all one. yakukuo.

to be angry. pashorayemi.

he came, left a termite nest on the ground, and went back to look for another. ai e koko ha prakiherini, ai ke e koko yuai mi hua re korayonow e i.

another, other. korayonow.

a dull buzzing came from the nest of the mosquitoes (supernatural insects). peti naki no yaripi rororomoma (mit.

to buzz, to produce a dull noise (burning fire, wind in the trees, etc.). rororomoma.

to be near. poushoku.

snake. pookokoki.

don't eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

to eat alone; to go to a certain place to eat (animals). hihimo.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the tapirs scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

disperse (and make parallel rows). pe mi ta yoããheri.

to scatter, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããma.

they danced one after the other and, when they finished, night fell. the pe ha praitaaruni, the pe ha prairini the mi titiray o m a.

they danced one after the other. praitaaruni.

they found the black-painted (dead) sorcerers scattered on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

scattered, strewn, spread out on the ground. tikukuwe.

he approached quickly and obstructed the orifice of the cavity where that one was. mieka he kahukema (mit.

to approach quickly. mieka.

with one fabricated with bone of cachicamo. moro ke iheapi yaini.

hook. iheapi.

to have the voice beginning to change. wã paruripiai.

to have the voice beginning to change. paruripiai.

(he/she) speaks upriver. atowa shiﬁ.

upriver. atowa.

banana plant about to flower (lit: pubescent banana plant). kuratha si moko.

pubescent. moko.

he staggers. he wahohoai.

to stagger. wahoho.

I roasted a cassava bread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

to cook, roast, or bake on or over a container placed directly on the embers, usually a cassava bread. rãmiãi.

Frog arched its back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch one. hikete.

to put the arms. wikokãi.

divididive montañero tree (Cassia multijuga). paokaihiti.

we have intentions of attacking them in any case. yama the pe niya shurukai he ha yatiokirini.

to attack them in any case. yatiokirini.

en un instante la mujer estuvo encinta y su vientre rápidamente engrosó. yetu ke e maka kãi pata ha kuparuni.

el mosquito está hinchado de sangre. ukushi a maka.

to have a belly; to be pregnant. mamaika.

to offer several parts to one or several people. aroakei.

"They are your own burned bones. kahe ke wa ishipe. ", shouted the parrot. werehi a wãri ta no kutarureshini (mit.

burned bones. kutarureshini.

to walk on tiptoe. hitesheaprarou.

the pubic hairs full of lice of the Female-Toucan flutter near me. ei mayepiriyoma pe no weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

pubic hair. weshiki.

that's how I'm going to do it in turn. ei naha ya the ki thaa mi hetukei.

to do something in the same way, to do something in turn. hetukei.

I filled their lungs with water and drowned them (the hekura), aren't they floating. mãu re u ha ya mishi kãi ha tuparuni ya pe mishi ha tumaparini, pe karorowe ma kui (cha.

to drown, to fill the lungs with water. tuparuni.

in his house I hung my hammock in the direction of the central plaza of the dwelling (from the lower to the upper part of the roof of the dwelling). kama yãno hami ya hehãoma.

central plaza. hehãoma.

(speech from upriver). sirãmi.

to have short legs (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). yerere.

gavilán, ave de rapiña (Buteo sp). shokãtãma ãshi.

I removed the ocumos (from the boiled water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to remove, extract, take out. hikehe.

to cry, to have tears in the eyes. mapu upe hai.

in. upe.

he/she is dead. a waiyorayoma.

to be dying. waiyorayou.

the pubic hair full of lice of the female toucan flutters near me. mayepiriyoma pe no weshiki no nomapi re shuririope ye.

pubic hair, lice. nomapi.

to become ripe, to begin to ripen by changing hue (fruit). shopoai.

in the cultivated field he crushed a plant against the ground. hikari theka hami api ke nasi wekepram a k e m a.

come, you will see the cultivated field. hapohe, wama theka mipe.

cultivated field, farm plot. hikari theka.

to tear into pieces, to shred (durative or plural object). rehihamai.

to become soft, to soften, to weaken, to lose strength. uhururu.

(to tie) the legs of a dead bird. mamisiki yorekai.

to tie the legs of a dead bird by turning them so that the claws catch behind the thighs (to carry it on one. yorekai.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

to gather, to group, to assemble, to collect. kokããi.

vomited (perfective). wekekerayou.

to be isolated again. yawerou.

I am in disagreement, you see, I do not approve and remain silent. ya puhi reatarou ha totihioni, "awei", ya kuu mai re ya kua totihipei ma re kuhe.

not to stop being in disagreement or opposing a decision. reatarou.

Aheanariwe ran opening a path through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

mythological ancestor. aheanariwe.

a woman grated cassava, put the pulp to dry, and cooked the cassava bread early in the morning. suwe theni nashi fiki ha hirikikini, fiki ha shirikiparini, fiki rãmãi fenapraoma.

to grate cassava. hirikikini.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokoreãi.

don't you see that it speaks like them (the Waika people). ei ke e nou ma re pashiomouwei.

(to) speak like the people from upriver, (to) speak with an accent, (to) speak a language that differs slightly from the local way of speaking. pashio.

do not insist on repeating that, that is what I say. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

to insist, to persist, to be obstinate. yati.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. wã hu.

colored. coloreadas.

to be hungry. pashiomo.

extend the hand to give or receive something. imiki totoo.

to extend, present, offer. totoo.

Macagua had drawn ugly circles on his body. prereimariwe wãritiwe a oni pata rohehoma.

had drawn. rohehoma.

(they) gather and form. tishoshai.

to gather and form. tishosho.

term of kinship, vocative; designates any direct blood relative, younger, and male (male or female speakers): younger brother, son, parallel cousin younger than Ego. ãi.

if you kill a big fat tapir near the lagoon, you will go to the conuco to get plantains to go with it. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe a wãri wawewawe praope ha kuratha wamaki ha toararini wama a tehiape.

lagoon, pond, marsh. korokoro.

(they two) dried out the water hole where Rahararitawe lived, and he, dying of thirst and crying, ran around because of them (looking for water). a no hete ha wehemaparini, rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama (mit.

to make dry, to dry out; to protect from rain. wehemai.

deposit (durative). papehou.

to have rolled up in a spiral. yapureprou.

he kept the tobacco pouch on the stone axe handle. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma (mit.

handle, stem, peduncle. fitho.

the honey sprang forth immediately. puu ke u pe hirekea re shoarayouwei (mit.

to jump, to spring forth. hireke.

the spirit takes possession of (someone's) mouth. kahiki teai.

to take possession of. teai.

to address a woman using the term ami, to have this kinship relationship with her. apami.

Bot. kanaye ninihi.

tree. kanaye.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikou.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with vertical yellowish lines. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati.

whose slope is covered with vertical yellowish lines. sherorati.

I didn't go down from the canoe to hunt doves on the shore. pe nape kupas.

to go down from the canoe to hunt doves on the shore. kupas?.

twisted at the tip (perfective, delayed inceptive). toyekerayou.

hammock, let the visitors eat in the hammock. chinchorro, deja que los visitantes coman sohei.

hammock. sohei.

pijiguao palms. pijiguaos.

when they arrived, they piled up the hunted animals one after the other in front of Horonãmi. horonãmi re iha e pe yaro hirapraai yaimou re kupeherouwei.

it is said that the women have the habit of coming here to kill fish (in the south of the Orinoco). eyeha yuri ke a no wãri shepraai yaimopihe, suwe peni.

to come. shepraai.

to start rolling (when the object was previously firmly fixed in its place). yapuruprou.

stay calm, be quiet, why do you have to go from one place to another to gossip. mamikai ke pe ta kuo, weti wama the pe wãhã hore thai kãi yototoaprarou.

to gather/meet in different places to gossip. yototoaprarou.

they go to camp in the forest to eat morã fruits. morã ma nape shurukouhe.

they go to camp in the forest to eat fruits. shurukouhe.

to become fragile or brittle. yeririprou.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to have persistent stomach pains, to regularly suffer from stomach pains. ninimomarei.

the Yãnomãmi will never leave off blowing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

renounce, leave off. onoo.

he really didn't have luck (to be here). a no wãi shi hiropraroma ke.

brought misfortune/bad luck. hiropraroma.

it was he who kept my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kaokai.

I don't have anything more (or: I don't have anything more at this moment). ya horiprao.

1. Not daring to ask for something that is needed. 2. Not having any more, being temporarily in a situation of need.. horiprao.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to shoot many arrows at a target without hitting it. tishikãi.

viscous, sticky. yoriki.

to receive a large number or quantity of something. thethepei.

Move away, my little one. oãsi, a ta payekeiku.

to move away for a while (e.g. to avoid a prohibited relative). payekeprao.

no dormir durante la noche. fmamo he wakarai.

al romper el día Rabipelado salió de la vivienda colectiva. nãro re a horeprarou he wakarai yaioma (mit.

to dawn, to stay up until dawn. waka.

deseaba metamorfosearse. a shi wãrihou puhio yaro.

metamorphose. wãrihou.

to throw an object at something else, to make an arrow fall. tisuaprai.

snakes are toad eaters (of the yoyo species). oru yoyo warewe ke a.

honey seeker, you who pretend to be a shaman, listen then. oi porewe, horehore hekuramorewe a wãri yimika ta taiku.

the one who performs (the action indicated by the verbal root). warewe.

they heard the sobs of the child. ihiru a miã wã hirimahe.

the nearby song of the paujíes is heard. ei paruri ke pe miã pata ahetewe totihiwe.

his wife cried for him (after his death). pe suwepi e miã no preoma.

Cries, sobs; mournful song of the paují and doves. hirimahe.

he/she died (lit. mishiã a kuami.

[mishiã hawei: to have too short a breath, not to blow hard enough to reach or affect the object being blown on; mishiã haweo: to die]. mishiã hawe.

breath, life force. mishiã.

to be in a sad situation, to be in disgrace, to have lost dignity, to have been defeated. noshi hiroai.

to cause disgrace, to bring the memory of a dead person. noshi hirou.

to be in a sad situation, to be in disgrace, to have lost dignity, to have been defeated. hiroai.

the branch is longer than the others. hiki poko rayokowe.

to protrude (of a branch). rayokowe.

to hang objects upside down with respect to their usual position, to hang (bunches of plantains or cambures so that they ripen). uticon.

It is because I feel uneasy about my two young sons, whose growth I have watched over. ãtãri ya ãhi mi re hatukeare, ya kipi nohi haruhupou totihio yaro.

young man. joven.

do not be afraid when young people direct arrows with bamboo tips towards you. ihiru pe rahakapi mi re puruhouwei ha, pe kiritihe.

what do I care that you direct your arrows towards me. ke ki mi wãri puruhamai ta pera she (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to converge, to head in the same direction; to have one. puruhuai.

put something at the bottom. hushomikei.

to kick violently. kahathoprakei.

do not eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

to eat alone; to usually go to eat at a certain place (animals). shihimou.

to have a knot at the tip, to be joined by a knot at the tip. moshokorea.

he insisted on calling me again and then I had a desire to accompany him. yare nakai he yatioma, ya ohotatariyoma.

to have a desire for something that one previously did not want. ohotatariyo.

"let's confront each other with sticks". "yamaki ta wapayo".

to measure oneself, to confront with sticks or clubs. wapayou.

to climb rapidly. hithehithe.

to be always running, to run several times in a row. rereoprou.

to separate. separar.

to enroll, to wrap around (inchoative). akareai, inc.

to enroll, to wrap around. akareai.

there was a landslide and everyone fell rolling. mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururayoma.

to fall rolling (rolling on itself). prururayou.

to bend, to fold, to curve. kohe.

they brought the large baskets full of chili peppers (near the fire, to dry them). praki re pe thari pata titeteakemahe.

they brought the large baskets full of chili peppers (near the fire, to dry them). titeteakemahe.

my son, go collect wapu fruits by striking the branches with a stick. pusi, wapu ke ki wai ta yayopra.

to collect fruits by striking branches with a stick to make them fall, to dislodge an arrow stuck in branches by throwing sticks at it, to notch the end of a piece of wood to split it by striking it against the ground. yayoai.

I went on foot (not in a canoe). washiti ha ya huma.

on firm ground, outside of water; by land (not in a canoe). fwashiti.

to have needed, to have lacked. horimorayou.

(funny): to eat quickly like that. krãrikrãrimou.

1. to gnaw, to eat a crunchy food [krãrikrãrimou (funny): to eat quickly like that]. 2. crunchy. krãri.

Woodpecker started to scrape the bark of the curare vine. ripuhusiriweni mamokori ke a hoãi shoapariyoma.

Woodpecker discovered the dangerous curare. ripuhusiriweni mamokori ke a wayu tararei no kureshi.

woodpecker. ripuhusiriweni.

to bite, to scrape with incisors. wãkekeãi.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, curling the body and taking momentum from the lower back to rise up. pushukupushukumou.

to curl up, to bend the legs against the chest. pushuku.

the pain. ni kreteni.

pain, ache. kreteni.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

to compress, crush; to press against the ground, to keep an object in place by putting a weight on it or applying pressure with the hand. hiki.

the shaman had a tortoise as his companion animal. shaporini poshotomi ke a hiima thapoma.

the shaman. shaporini.

to have the head turned. mi yaio.

to have the head turned. mi yai.

to remain for a moment one against another. hohãthãprao.

to inform, to tell someone where something is located. hemikei.

sit here. a ta roikiyo.

he went quickly to hide behind the trees and immediately called the human beings. pei ke yo ha yetu ke the pata ha wariripraikiyoni, yãnomãmi the nakai shoaoma.

to go. ikiyo.

they have to gather leaves and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'only'. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe.

if only I could enjoy a broth. ya the pouku wãri ha totihiarini.

some time passed, then he left and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'it'. the no ha tetetaruni a korãyoma.

he gave it to me and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'say'. the hipepema.

rómpe si koropirimi me una rama con frutas moshima and also it can be The word 'the' in Yanomami means 'to'. the ki ta keprari, pei ke siki.

they. the.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

have you offered (something). yaikihawe.

the raw caterpillars were (arranged) above, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached to the bottom (of the package). heaka ha kasha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to transport a full container to the brim; to keep a container in that state. anikipou.

we climb the pijiguao palms to collect their fruits. rasha yama ki hirirãi.

to climb a spiny trunk using two crossed poles tied with vines. hiririkei.

to have been trampled, to have been trodden on, to present footprints. kãshikã.

no dormir durante la noche. fmamo he wakarai.

al romper el día Rabipelado salió de la vivienda colectiva. nãro re a horeprarou he wakarai yaioma (mit.

to dawn, to stay up until dawn. waka.

to become deep. okoprou.

obtain, give or receive. pãyereke.

you will step on a snake. oru wa katikirei.

I stepped right on the snake and it immediately bit me. oru keki praope ha ya ki pesheku re katikireiwei, pe the ki waweheprakei kurei.

to step on, to tread on. katikirei.

to bend, to curve. payoko.

hay poca miel, y los nidos están aprisionados en las horcaduras de los árboles. pei u pe wai hãkikiwe.

aprisionados, atascados. hãkikiwe.

Ouch!. haso!.

to board one after the other. tikepraai.

large white larva; Pelidnota chamaeleon (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). oropori.

to develop small warts. simopiãi.

(no clear translation provided). pehi niyã.

only small fragments fell. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to break into small pieces, to fragment. nakashiai.

uncovered cotton. shinari uku hapresha no.

to uncover, reveal, strip (e.g. cotton fibers). hapreshe.

the scarlet-billed puffbird with the red beak. yorekitirami husi re wakewei.

beak, bill (of a bird). yorekitirami.

he stumbled. a yuturayoma.

Squirrel was moving by jumping (mit. karioriwe ke a wãri yutuaprarou re kuaaiwei.

to be projected (with some degree of force or violence), to jump from branch to branch (a bird, a monkey, etc.). yuturayou.

to sharpen a point. hitoto.

he makes the noise louder. a wã nakeamai.

to make something more flavorful, spicy or pungent. nakekei.

to be large, to have grown. yawewe.

do a lot of that. the no wãrowe ta peai.

the cow is very fat. ware a no wãrowe tapi.

as it was raining a lot I was wet and cold. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

in great quantity, a lot. wãrowe.

the child is full from the breast. fihiru a hiekea.

to fill up to the brim. hieke.

the fish has many bones/spines. yuri a niosi.

the siparariwe fish are full of bones/spines. siparariwe pe niosipi.

fish bone, fish spine. niosi.

botanical, tree (unidentified). terio hi.

the crab holes are truly there (without doubt there live crabs there). eyoshi ma ta toprarani.

I truly have a lot of cold. ya wahati ma ta yaitani.

truly, really, indeed. toprarani.

we stopped nearby and launched a clamor. ahete ha yama e ki upratou ha shoaroni, yamaki rariprariyoma.

to launch a collective clamor. rariprou.

to slap repeatedly, plural acts. pairarei.

he went around the camp examining it (then he said to himself): "but where could they have gone. yãno ke pe miã tiporea ha hititiapotuni: "weti hami wa the pe kurayoma ta thawe. ". ".

to go around in a circular form, to go around. tiporei.

we slept during the night and then descended from the mountain (upon waking in the morning). yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descend by a slope. haruawei.

I heard you. pe ã hirioma.

I heard you. hirioma.

to do something quickly. ãteãtem.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

To go ashore, to disembark. hashiri-.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to carry something under the arm, to carry an object tucked between the skin and the loincloth; to keep an object pressed. hãkipouwei.

when the day broke. wawetomi wapoko.

to dawn, to break (of day). wakakaai.

it was a good hunting dog. hiima a nihitaoma.

to be a good hunter (of a woman, man or dog), to have good aim. nihitaoma.

to eat. reye.

Hurry up and go down. pe ithoai ta haitaru: apúrense a bajar.

Go around and also it can be The word 'ru' in Yanomami means 'to steal'. a ta ãyoru: haz un rodeo.

perfective verbal suffix. ru.

Rayo (Lightning). Tãhirãwe.

he whistled when he was near the entrance (of the south of the Orinoco). pei yoka ha a ahetou tehe a husi koikoimoma.

1. to approach (continuation of aheai), 2. to not be afraid of approaching (a relative, a hostile person). ahetou.

He put himself on the ground. Rasio ama pei.

to put oneself or to be (on the ground). rasio.

there the váquiros had already divided into two parallel rows. kihami ware ke ki yakaroprou waikipara yomawe.

to divide into two parallel rows or lines. yakaroprou.

(he/she) untangles it. fyo shi kate.

to untangle, to disentangle. kate-.

kumãrãroriwe: mythological ancestor, he taught the jaguar the art of moving silently. kumãrãroriwe: antepasado mitológico, le enseñó al jaguar el arte de desplazarse silenciosamente.

centipede. kumãrãwe.

to receive an object that has been untied. kushepei.

to be angry. ikuiku.

supernatural being associated with clay pots. oshoporithawe.

to be slightly tense. fkarerehe.

to burn a magical substance near an enemy. yayou.

to save a child by breastfeeding it. mi thapo.

to save someone. thapo.

to fall to the ground (without realizing it, often due to the effect of a hallucinogen). praariyo.

The Picure woman had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). ani yorehi si patetepoma.

had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). patetepoma.

to be about to be painted in that manner. hikikirayou.

get all into the canoe. kanawa hami wamaki komi tikekea ha shoaparuni.

to carry out a task together, to do all together. komiprou.

Mother-in-law, did the wapu fruit lose its bitterness. yapemi, wapu ke ki mihitaimi thawe. It has been soaking for a long time. the no nohi teteapiyei.

to lose bitterness, become edible. mihita.

to become hollow, to crack in a place. wareshe.

Titiri was perched, at the moment when his tail was pointing downwards, Horonami shot him with a poisoned dart. titiri a rooma, e teshinaki pata ithãprao tehe horonamini a horaprarema.

for a short time, momentarily. ithãprao.

Verbal suffix used to express the narrative present tense. -wei.

kill the konakona ants with embers, striking firebrands against each other (in this example the pronoun wahe you two refers to a single person: it is a mother-in-law addressing her son-in-law). konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to scatter embers by striking firebrands against each other (to drive away and kill ants). yashishikei.

to become audible, discernible. peprou.

you will remember this. wa puhi hatukeope.

to remember, to recall. hatukeo.

to decompose, to reach an extreme state of putrefaction (wood, clothing, etc., except when dealing with animal matter). ruthaai.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

to wonder. marani.

eh you, give a turn around there. kiha kahe a ta ãyoiku.

give a turn around there, go around there. ãyoiku.

to surpass slightly, to be slightly taller than. torehehe.

pus, suppuration. poupou*.

to hang low, to tie with a long rope. preyukai.

they say that the old man from Horetoi, the one with spotted skin, wants to come and blow dangerous substances at me. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

leaves that are used to make the roof of a dwelling and which, being in distant places, force camping in the forest during their collection. fyãã hena henitiwe.

to go for several days to the forest with a specific purpose; to participate in a prolonged hunt; to collect leaves (to cover a roof); to smoke fish; to attack enemies through magical substances (and travel a journey that lasts several days). henitiiwei.

the dog curled up. hiima a motorekema.

to coil, curl up, form a loop or circle. motore.

let's consume the broth of their cooking, the váquiros who live on the plain. huope, yahe pouku koai ta yaio ke e.

let. huope.

it hurts me. ya wari pe rii ha nini.

my foot hurts. ya mamiki nini.

to have pain, to suffer (terminative). físinikereprou.

central part of the sky. ãmo misi.

pain that amplifies, a significant message that visitors are about to arrive (they trample the ground and thus revive the pain). fnini kashuu.

to feel a violent pain due to a blow received in combat. fnini tihetiprou.

pain, ache. fnini.

he was moving making the turtle jump. poshotomi maka ke a wãri maiãtarama.

making jump. maiãtarama.

I have just killed a woman. mã u ya u riprarei kuhe.

to kill (a woman). riprarei.

to soften (certain substances, certain fruits). prehepirayou.

post that supports the rear part of the roof of a dwelling or shelter. shikrã.

the capuchin monkeys were moving towards us among the trees. yawerewe ke ki imiimama yetu yamareki wãri ayaa ha tikoreni.

moving towards us. imiimama.

to feel stomach pains after people from another community have seen one. maikaprou.

it oscillated (between their hands). ésta oscilaba (entre sus manos).

oscillated. oscilaba.

oh esposo mío chamán, cruza el umbral de esta casa (lamento funerario). w ãroye a hekura kãi ta horeponi.

cross the threshold. horeponi.

the water hinders his progress but he returns to put foot on dry land. mau ke u ha a shi wãripariyo kuhe, a hashiria re kokeheriiwei.

we return to dry land, we immediately set out, and our line stretches out. yamaki ha hashiriikuni, yamaki re hirihiã re shoarayouwei.

to put foot on dry land, to come ashore. hiriprou.

(while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk). ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei (mit.

to swell, inflate, dilate. hiriai.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

trajeron. shiro.

los ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati.

ciempiés venenosos. weyarati.

(synonym, used upriver). rumãhã.

1. to bend, to fold under weight. 2. fissure.. yashoa.

like an arrow it had unfortunately hit one of his children (during the confrontation). riheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

like an arrow. riheni.

the wasp nest whose (tubular) opening is curved. kopina moroshi re payokoi.

curved, hooked, having the shape of a circumference arc, being completely curved. payokowe.

to fill up to the top. iyekeai.

I claim the goods, while the demons of dusk reject my hands. weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hãiihe tehe, ya ta nako sho.

Brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do we will jostle each other. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to jostle, push aside, reject someone. hãihãi.

they scratched each other (perfective reciprocal). hukekayoray.

kopohe: your husband has just arrived. heãhãturiwe : kopohe: justamente tu esposo acaba de llegar.

demonio maligno de la clase yai the asociado a terrenos movedizos. kopohe.

to have a side. wereheai.

thanks to the soap, it will certainly become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to become completely white or clean. auprou.

to harden, to become abnormally compact (the pulp of a fruit). amatopiai.

Bat coveted his mother-in-law's pubic hair (lit. pei weshi pe ha heweriwe a puhi waioma (mit. : Bat desired his mother-in-law's pubic hair). ).

to desire, to covet, to envy. waioma.

at dawn they offered baskets of food, they offered baskets full of momo fruits. the pe ni ithãprayou ha henaponi, momo ke a ithãprai ha kuparuheni.

they offered baskets of food. ithãprayou.

The sun made it dark. Potepiamai ke rai.

to become dark, to take on a dark shade, to get tanned. iai.

come here to fan the fire. koa wake ta yareyo.

I'm going to kill the agouti by blowing smoke into its den. opo ya yareprai.

to fan the fire using a flat object (a fan, a bellows, a lid, folded leaves, etc.); to asphyxiate an animal by blowing smoke into its den in this way. yarei.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe transformed. wãtetetaruni, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei (mit.

to have become narrow/closed (perfective aspect). wãteterayou.

I landed in a place where the vegetation left an open space. u ka re yakere ha ya katioma.

I landed/docked. katioma.

to wait for daybreak to do something. harumai.

(related to pee nahe kare). pee nahe hiipou.

your son will be brave (lit. wa ihirupi wayuope.

to give birth with pain. fihirupi.

we went together to gather firewood that we needed (to cook) for the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

to gather together to exchange goods (during a trade). pathothama.

descending path. fyo mi werewe.

descending. wererea.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

his loose teeth. ukeraruni.

he is not brave (negative phrase), he does not take revenge. nosi ahiomi ke.

to not fear anything, to be brave, reckless. nosi ahi.

as they wanted to take possession of his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

I took the gallineta from a hawk (that had killed it). koikoimi iha hãshimo ya he rumakema.

to take possession of (a woman from a killed man, prey from a predator). ruamaheni.

you will have sex many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already had sex. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

to have sex, to make love. hiriprai.

while abandoning the dwelling to go live in the forest, the embers took flight (transformed into bees). the pe sipoprou tehe oshohore ke ki yeprou re kupariyowei.

to abandon the collective dwelling to camp in the forest. sipoprou.

a spirit that enters the body of shamans when they take hallucinogens, causing them to clench their fists and have convulsions. yãruana.

to become less and less visible in the dark. warosho.

two tails. horohopi shinakipi.

two, a pair; a small quantity. horohopi.

to shake. hirihiri.

the man was squeezing Siroromi tightly without letting go. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

to compress, to squeeze tightly. ãkikiãkei.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered with longitudinal lines. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to trace several longitudinal lines, to scratch several times (longitudinally). shetitirei.

child associated with the hayakawe palm. hayakawãyoma.

to send the hekura to attack. wayurumou.

have you finished painting your body. wamaki yãmoã hititiraruhawe.

but where have they gone. weti hami pe hurayou kuhawe.

have you found them. wa the ki tararei kuhawe.

mother, have you offered meat (to the visitors). nape, yaro wa hipea yaikihawe.

denotes perplexity or doubt. kuhaw.

to be sad (in the absence of a loved one). okii.

I decorated the bamboo tip with various geometric motifs. rahaka ya mi onimai.

to paint geometric motifs on the face, to have the face painted with geometric motifs. onio.

your friend. no rimihe.

his/her friend. pe no rimipi.

friend, person with whom one is on good terms, person with whom one has an exchange relationship. rimipi.

the woman will respond favorably to my advances. kamiye ke iha suwe a noshi ihitakei.

to think that a woman will respond favorably to advances. ihitakei.

tense bow and also it can be The word 'rahaka' in Yanomami means 'bamboo tip'. rahaka hetho.

Give me arrows with bamboo tips. rahaka hetho ta hiyoraruhe.

tense. rahaka.

—Cuñado, ¿de verdad eres tú. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe. —¡Sí, de verdad soy yo. —awei ke, kamiye ke.

yes, indeed. awei.

the ancestors made each other bleed (fought among themselves and caused wounds). no patapi pe iyepe yapikamayou no kupereshi (mit.

do not cease to visit us, since you claim goods (lit. yoku matha waiamai tikootihe, wamaki ma re nakouwei.

he was advancing along the path. pei yo hami a kuaaherima.

reciprocal. yo.

to become ill due to the loss of one. noreshipiai.

this has the smell of a capuchin monkey. the ni kurisipisini.

having the characteristic smell of (something). kurisipisini.

he is a brave man. fpe perio.

brave man. fpe.

it is here where the demon of the disease has been tied (around the organ of a sick person). eha no wãri a re hatetepe ye (cha.

to begin to tie firmly in that way all the vines at the end of a hammock. hateteprai.

to be mixed (members of different communities, objects of different nature). koyokowe.

"He managed to free himself", they said. "suwe a hukeprou tao", wa hore pu.

to manage to free oneself from a restraint. hukeprou.

those who sing saying yau kwã kwã kwã. ei ki re yaukuwemouwei.

piapoco (people). yaukuwemo.

ellos cosechan hojas de caña de la India partiéndolas con los dedos. komishi henape yeriihe.

recolectar, arrancar partiendo con los dedos, recoger hojas de tabaco de esa manera. yeriihe.

it refers to the deceased wife of a man (lit. fshikãpi re thãrimionowei.

the lower part of the roof of a dwelling or shelter; the area behind a dwelling. fshikã.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

bee. abeja.

the path is muddy. yo kawehewe.

to be muddy everywhere. kawehewe.

to crush diverging, to disperse. raipraai.

to start tearing off someone. tiriprai.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. fmatotowe yo.

path that runs along the ridge of a hill. fmatotowe.

(related to leaves). henasi.

to shorten, to shrink. hokatai.

to have an empty stomach. koehewe.

I have the impression that there is a lot of honey in that nest. puu a no no nihio re totihiopiwe.

to have the impression that there is a great quantity of something. totihiopiwe.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to hold the arms above the head with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to hold the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekou.

form of shouting of birds when calling their chicks; rejoicing at the return of a loved one. oshemou.

to have curved nails. torekewe.

I am angry. ya hushuo.

he gets angry for no reason and also it can be The word 'hushuo' in Yanomami means 'to get angry'. a hushuo si ihehewe.

to be angry. hushuo.

when the speaker is in the house. wakarapei.

the ripe plantain smelled good, he cut and ate several pieces with his incisors and finished it. kuratha a ni kreteri ha a ha weheriararini, a mi watherema.

to eat quickly. weheriarei.

you will suffer mutually (during the cremation) with this eternal fire. wamaki no wãri preaamayou pera.

eternal, immortal, endless. preaamayou.

in a low voice; barely audible. mahaniniwe.

tree (taxonomic classification). wãrãri.

during the night the inflorescence of the manaka palm will incline. titi ha manaka ãthe mi wereprariyo.

will incline. wereprariyo.

he walked along the ridge of the mountain where Aparecido was camping. perio totihiope hami the re matotaheriiwei.

he walked along the ridge of the mountain where he was camping. matotaheriiwei.

shotgun (archaism). ãrekerimi.

to shoot a rihu masi arrow. rihu masi tiheheai.

the demons took away my son (lit. yai theni rihuye masi yepirei kuhe.

small thin arrow made of palm wood with the tip hardened in fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. rihuye.

the young people, for their part, wove open-weave mapires. huya peni yorehi si tuyei ayaoma.

the young people. ayaoma.

to knead the cassava flour so that some liquid remains inside it. urereai.

to crouch down until being with. rasi.

reddish, pale red. wãkewãke.

he approached quickly to the place where the ashes of the cremated body were. oshohore ke ki no preope hami, the ikua re shoatakeiwei.

the place where the ashes of the cremated body were. shoatakeiwei.

to curve, to bend (continuous). hishokoai.

to curve, to bend. hishoko.

the tobacco is more or less large. nahe kumamasi.

relatively large tobacco plant. kumamasi.

the people of Tayari shot their arrows from far away, many arrows that missed the target. tayari theri peni rapa ha the tishikaihe, pruka shereka ke ki tishikamahe.

they missed the target. tishikamahe.

plants that grow. hishihishimou.

however, the branch of the yagrumo tree had bent under the weight of the tapir climbing on it. kahu u siki poko hithothetou ma totionowei.

to bend under weight (perfective aspect of the inchoative). hithotherayou.

itheripou: to transport a load thus increased. itheripou: transportar una carga así aumentada.

to transport. transportar.

the two shapono are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the ancestor Capuchin Monkeys were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to have been placed or to have placed oneself one next to the other (low and rounded objects). tipetea.

Manner that they have. kãhiãmou.

(to cover the roof of a dwelling), factual; (to cover the roof of a dwelling), perfective, plural object or plural subject; (to cover the roof of a dwelling), perfective. yãmãpou, fact.

to cover the roof of a dwelling. yãmãpou.

He could take it. pe koãpe ke tao.

could, possibility. koãpe.

to split. kahatho.

animal that can be. yoamou.

Espíritu-luna se elevaba, y las flechas no llegaban hasta él. periporiwe a ha isirini pe shereka hawepraai yaioma.

yo me levanto. ya i s i h e r i i.

to rise, grow, sprout (a plant). isirini.

to have smelled bad. wãrirãyou.

the momo fruits are the ãpru (beetles). momo pe re kui ãpru ke pe.

dung beetle, scarab beetle. ãpru.

to pick chili peppers. huko mo co a coger ajíes.

to harvest, to pick (fruit). haho.

only a few were able to get out of the water quickly. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

1. to get out of a canoe, to set foot on land, to get out of the water; 2. to carry several objects from a canoe or water to land. washiriai.

"you have had a slip of the tongue", this is the news that I will truly spread. "wa aka tihekia re yaipe", a wãno wã thaprai yaia kutaeni.

to make a slip of the tongue, to have a lapse. tihekia.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another people. ashiki.

to indicate (upriver dialect). feri.

they went there to open the tree hollow where there is a yãmonã bee nest (= they went to harvest the honey of the yãmonã bee). yãmonã kiha re ma pe pehi kãi tiyei re kukeiwei.

bee species (unidentified). yãmonã ma.

he waited for the woman. kama yahi hami suwe ke a no tapoma.

to wait for someone. tapoma.

Õmawe advanced crouched (in order not to be seen), and crouched down. omawe a ha teretereikuni, a yerekema.

to advance crouched (in order not to be seen). teretereikuni.

to cross in X, to arrange. pakira.

go look for arrow canes at the limit of the cane thickets. shereka siki he wetikia re totihire ha a shereka ta ukahe she.

limit, border. wetikia.

they took a bath to purify their body that smelled, accompanying closely. ke kipi ni hithãri pakokai kuaai re paki shoatariyowei.

to be dragged, to accompany closely. paki.

I have conjunctivitis. ya mamo wayupi.

(they) had conjunctivitis. mamo wayupirariyo.

to have conjunctivitis. wayupi.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. yaweremi.

the malefic spirits (yai) were becoming numerous, it is said. yai the pe ma manikou tehe, a harayoma.

malefic spirits. yai-.

fall one after another (fruits). shithã.

the lechosa (fruit) begins to be a little ripe in one place. shamakoro wãisipi a shopo patia.

to be stained in one place; to have burned in one place (fire in a clearing); to occupy a small area. patia.

Siroromi crushed his whole body, and when he had finished he stuck his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

1. to quickly add ashes to the hallucinogenic yopo powder. 2. to quickly make a bowstring by rolling the fiber on the thigh with the palm of the hand.. hitiki.

I have offered a machete. sipara ya hipekema.

I have offered. hipekema.

immobilize an animal by pressing it with the foot. katikipou.

los árboles horoeti son realmente muy frágiles, se rompen muy fácilmente. the hi noni ta yaitani, ihi re the hipe kreyou si ihehewe ta yaitani.

to become fragile. noniãi.

he suddenly put his hand on the drooping leaves. henaki re teihiawei hami imiki wariprakema.

to put the hand suddenly on something. wariprakema.

to turn yellow (plant). frã.

to unleash, to trigger. desencadenar-.

to take an object without looking at the person. mamoku si he noho mamo maimi.

to take an object without looking at the person. noho.

To wear out. waruhuai.

one of the five levels of the Yanomami cosmos. watawatawe.

as an arrow had inadvertently hit one of his children (during the confrontation), we threatened each other. ãtãri ãhini pe ihirupi a ha hãroprariheni, yamaki ã teteoma.

to inadvertently hit or affect someone/something while aiming at something else, due to clumsiness or bad luck. hãroprariheni.

aspirate the soft pulp. wapumi.

to cause to have pain in the foot (from a blow or wound). yutukupramai.

the wind was violent and the trees were bent over one another. ikãri the watorimoma, hiki makekoma.

to be bent over one another. makekoma.

he killed those who were beautiful (lit. the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiprai ha kuparuni.

to decide to kill a specific person. katitiprai.

tuqueque; Thecadactylus rapicauda (Gekkonidae). sheshehari.

to be at rest (an animal). hothoo.

vegetable food that serves to. tehi.

vegetable food. tehi.

edible fruit of the terio hi tree. terio.

to retrace the path one after the other. tatopraai.

unfortunately, when they were returning one after the other bringing game, Iewe confiscated them. ai peni yaro pe koprouhe tehe ieweni pe toai remou tikoma.

to take, obtain, get (plural objects). torarei.

child. oshetawe.

to climb up a tree to perch on a branch. tikepeherayou.

to walk ahead for a while. oratamakei.

to open, to crack, to separate (the edges of an elongated object). hãthoãi.

bite it. fhe wetiai.

to bite. wetiai.

taken by force. komãkei.

to be convinced. mirãhãpou.

he had caught fish and was carrying the bundle on his back. yuri e ki yokerarema e hãro ha yehireni.

to catch a fish. yokerei.

1. To insist on, to persist in doing something despite an obstacle or difficulty. 2. To accumulate little by little, to carry out a task little by little; to cook a large amount of food in several stages. yãshi.

to be constipated. shi hoki.

the Waika went to war (and one of them said) "now I will really kill him" (upriver dialect). waika pe wayu fa aruf erini: "fei tehe ya wãri prapou ta totihio" (habla de río arriba.

to go to war, to participate in a war expedition. wayu aruherii.

here there are not many, hung tightly together (hanging pots). hei ke e pe pata ma re hãrokowe.

objects hung tightly together. hãrokowe.

I ate it (this morning). ya warei ke a kuroi.

to eat. warei.

all the trees that I cut to collect the honey of the oi bees, get caught, one after the other. oi ya he pehi kãi pashokai ma kure, pe he pehi hããtarou tikoo thai.

to get caught, to get stuck. hããtarou.

I am dizzy. rororomi kona.

to be dizzy. rororomi.

it was as if enemy shamans had thrown something, I picked it up, it was a vine. hawe okã peni the sheyekemahe the ha kupraruni, ya the ha hokereni, thoo thotho kuoma.

as if, like. sheyekemahe.

to reflect, to think. aaya.

they are many, standing one next to the other, with their heads covered in white down. pe he horoi yorukuwe (mit.

to stand in large numbers close together, forming a compact mass. yorukuprawe.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to order, to request a favor (for oneself). nosiyemoru.

¿van a preparar esa correa para (llevar) la olla. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

correa (strap, cord). thaare.

to singe a bird; to burn the fur of an animal before butchering and cooking it. mi fukukuai.

to singe, burn off feathers/fur before cooking. fukuku.

construct a large one. the ta praukuku.

to extend, to enlarge, to make extensive. praukukei.

manufactured object, object that comes from foreigners (during a ceremonial speech). nape itho to manufacturado, objeto que proviene de exvb.

foreign woman, woman who does not belong to the Yanomami ethnic group. apeyoma.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). kasitamakei.

I believed it was a gallineta (bird). h ãshimo ya puhirema.

to believe, to think, to be convinced. puhirema.

rumai: 1. rumai: 1. To put to flight. Poner en fuga. 2. 2. To put out of reach, to protect goods from envy of others (often by hiding them in the forest). Poner fuera de alcance, proteger bienes de la envidia de los demás (a menudo escondiéndolos en la selva).

to put to flight, to put out of reach, to protect goods from envy of others (often by hiding them in the forest). rumai.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

to disappear behind or under something, to hide behind something. shãhoãi.

(antonym of aka porepiai). aka piyeke.

he doubted climbing. the wãri tuo kuyeapraroma.

to doubt. kuyeaprarou.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

to loosen, to become loose. proromai.

to slip suddenly out of position. wahoprakei.

to make a sucking noise with the tongue to call someone. teketekemou.

to disperse, to scatter. rãkokãi.

both resuscitated without the help of anyone. yãmi ke kipi horiprariyoma.

they resuscitated. horiprariyoma.

to slither arching the body, turning while bringing the arms backwards. akretetou.

the two women sat down slowly on the edge of the hammock, then one of them lay down against it. ke kipi re tipeariyouwei, yetu ai ke a re yakakeiwei.

they sat down slowly on the edge of the hammock. tipeariyouwei.

tomorrow I will work in the fields (downstream). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

I will work in the fields (downstream). hikarimokiriope.

to place oneself for a while in the center, to go for a while in the middle of the water. ãmotapei.

to crunch, to eat something crunchy. kãri.

I pull the vines (to break them). thoo ya thotho ikokai.

to pull down, to force down. ikutaai.

they returned on their steps, they gave up (their visit). acagua.

to arrange the firewood tightly around the central fire. koã ãshoku titetepei.

to arrange the firewood tightly around the central fire. titetepei.

he was in his hammock and swinging with his foot while whistling. estaba en su chinchorro y se balanceaba con el pie mientras silbaba.

whistling. silbaba.

to get caught on the bottom (usually a hook). shatipariyo.

ser ganchudo; estar enrollado sobre sí mismo. mi kuyuhuwe.

ser ganchudo; estar enrollado sobre sí mismo. mi kuyuhuwe.

I sew a garment. iro ya siki tuyei.

1. To cut, fell (a tree or palm); to demolish the earth with blows of a machete or knife, to enlarge an opening in this way (a burrow, a beehive, etc.); to bite (a snake). 2. To unite elements together: to sew, darn, weave; to tie together with vines the elements that make up a raft (tree trunks or plants of cambur or plantain).. tuye.

what can be crushed and ground with the fingers. tihuamou.

he told his two sons to get into the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemaparema.

to tell someone to get into a canoe. tikemaparei.

pile up the leaves, each one on their side, we will spread them out again (to hide our tracks). hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope.

he piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

to pile up, to gather (multiple objects). yototamai.

1. Dodge a projectile by twisting the torso. 2. Twist off a fruit by rotating it between the hands; wring out (wet clothes).. ãihi.

to cut a tree. manakoro.

go and join your husband (where he is located). heãroye ke iha a ta aruheriyo.

go and join (someone, in the place where they are located). aruheriyo.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin. urekemarei.

to be dry and hard. yihitiprou.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. yairaririni.

they (two) supported the scaffold on the sharp edge of Mount Sipara. sipara ke V.

edge, sharp edge. reiawei.

to stop visiting (a person, a community). he tatotoo.

to stop visiting (a person, a community). tatotoo.

to start frying, roasting, or toasting. hãrikiprai.

I don't make any noise of a broken branch (I don't make any noise), I just drag myself along. krai.

to move in a certain way, to drag oneself, to happen without apparent reason. yonii.

on the nape of the (dead) dog there was a single tooth mark. hiima oraki ha tahiapi kanosi kuoma.

tooth mark; wound left by a bite, tooth marks on bitten food. kanosi.

dogs lift their leg to urinate. hiima pe waku ayatou pe niaasi keyei tehe.

thigh. wãku.

to have the smell of rotting flesh or fish; to have the smell of coroba fruits that have been soaked in water. thopoko.

they turned into coatis (in mythology). yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma (mit.

they turned into coatis. yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma.

Yotenama broke the spine of the older boys. yotenamani pe re mãrãnãpiwei pe mi kreama.

to break the spine of a living being. mãrãnãpiwei.

male howler monkey. paují macho.

1. male howler monkey, called that because of its cry (onomatopoeic). 2. to howl (intransitive verb). paipai.

to cause fatigue, to tire. motamai.

to be tight, pressed together. shãnini.

to sink into the water under the weight of something. kaokopariyo.

1. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tireshai.

I made a scratch on myself. ya iprushiprariyoma.

to have made several scratches. iprushiprariyoma.

to descend vertically (perfective). wahohorayou.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pe re koyokaiwei, ya pe nowã thaa shoarei kurei.

people of another community. koyokomou.

they hide (in the forest) their hammocks of bejuco. thoo thotho pe ropramaihe.

they hide (in the forest) their hammocks of bejuco. ropramaihe.

the souls danced one after the other. porepore pe praiai mi hetuoma.

to do in turn, to alternate, to change activity or instrument. raiai.

He has a big bruise. Puturãmãpi ama wake.

bruise, contusion. puturãmãpi.

(myth): it curled up to jump, it jumped up, and it grabbed the sun. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

1. to become hard like leather, to shrivel up; to curl up on oneself 2. to shorten (by losing a part, breaking). pusutu.

he/she left the cooking water to evaporate. u wehetimapema.

left the cooking water to evaporate (by negligence). wehetimapema.

kinship term, vocative, synonym of pushi. pushikawe.

we are shooting arrows at him. pemakini pema a niyapraai.

we (I and them) are at war against them. kamiye yamakini yama pe niyapraai.

to have the habit of sharing someone. iyapraai.

towards. aba-.

to drink. weikiai.

to dry (plural objects). wehetirariyo.

to pretend that one does not know who is guilty of a harm. mohotumorayou.

flea, small cockroach species (unidentified). kopathama.

the bejuco de cadena is concave (in reality it is sinuous). rasirasi thotho a mi hopokowe.

concave. pokowe.

to have done something in the past. ayatamarei.

to adjust badly, to put crookedly, to introduce badly, to close imperfectly; to not bury deep enough. hietimakei.

to be in plain sight, to be in a place where one is visible. fwaweto ha(mi).

to be visible, to be in plain sight. fwaweto.

the little birds died. yarariyoma.

to do something next/later. sherekani yu.

then, next, later, finally. yu-.

when you are thirsty, you roll a funnel-shaped leaf and thus collect the water from the trickle that falls into the hollow of the rocks. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni, pei masi ha u wau yotãyotãmope ha wa u hapa koarei.

funnel-shaped leaf (for putting something inside). oshokorek.

suegro, apúrate, cuando el sol todavía está bajo, las abejas se hacen visibles. shoape a ta haiaprarou, e naha the kuo tehe pei re naki wawetoai.

to stop being dense or crammed. wawetoprou.

brother-in-law, above all do not insinuate that it is dirty. shori, shami himai tikootihe.

to ask someone how to do something, to get oneself taught, to get oneself shown. himãmai.

to be cold. wahatii.

to be situated beyond a certain place, to be farther than. torehea.

I wait for the cassava to mature before eating it. nashi ya koko etemai.

to pass from light to dark, to become tanned or bronzed; roots of cassava and ocumo tubers that darken as they mature. eteãi.

the earthen wall that covers the burrow of the waraima lizard. waraima akatho heporashi.

1. Inflorescence of certain grasses (corn, arrow cane). 2. Earthen partition that obstructs the burrow of certain lizards.. heparashi.

to fail repeatedly in curing a sick person. imiki huhehou.

the hekura spirits have abandoned me, I have become a powerless shaman. ware tiraatarai waikiomahe, tira no ke ya.

to fail, to be unable to do something, to give up, to abandon. huhe.

the jaguar broke off the dog's head with its teeth (myth). irani hiima ke he wahetiprai ha kuparuni (mit.

the tip/end of something. los wã hira.

He kept the ant nest on the ground near him. konakona pe pesi prapou heweoma.

Here is a turtle (on the ground). hei totori pe praa kur e.

1. To conserve something on the ground. 2. To beat, kill someone. 3. To be placed on the ground, to be situated in a certain place, to occupy a certain area (field, dwelling).. pramapou.

she had put thoru flowers in her earlobes, and looked really beautiful. thoruki ha huureni the yimikaki no aiwe yaiwe.

put a cotinga skin in my earlobe (= give me a cotinga skin). heimi siki ta huupari.

to carry something in the earlobe. huurei.

to sharpen the point of something. namo hiroro-.

to fray, to become frayed. thauweshiai.

extend, stretch out a finger. fi mihena kashesheai.

extend, stretch out a finger. kashesheai.

the arrows that the ancestors shot fell short (the arrows fell without reaching the target). poreri pe sherekapi hawepraai yaioma (mit.

to fall short, to not reach the target. hawepraai.

he was approaching the beehive when Hairless shot him with a poisoned dart. oi ke a yotoharimai poushokuai tehe, nãroni a horama.

to undertake the last part of a journey, to not be too far from the goal during a journey; to approach. poushokuai.

Rabipelado advanced hiding behind the trees. nãroriwe hii ke hi pe hami a wãri hiririãpraroma (mit.

to lie along, to lean against (an elongated object). hiririo.

to cry for a dead person (lit. fhushihipi hoyai.

the women have already cried for the dead. suwe pe hushihipi hoyaa waikirayou kuhe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw snot). hushihipii.

to get one or more blisters on the hand. fimiki si thoroho.

to get a blister in a specific place. thorohokei.

new sprout (shoot, sprout, stem); new feather of a growing bird. shiputukupi.

the yawari shot arrows at the toucans, one of them got stuck (in a tree). yawari peni mayepi e pehi niyakemahe, shereka e shatikema.

Mount Maiyo rose again, very visibly. maiyo ke ki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini (mit.

to be fixed perpendicularly, to penetrate inside, to be embedded; to rise (mountain). shatikema.

"you have had a slip of the tongue", this is the news that I will truly spread. "wa aka tihekia re yaipe", a wãno wã thaprai yaia kutaeni.

to have made many mistakes while speaking, to have spoken incorrectly habitually. tihekimorãyou.

to have a wider opening than the main body. hãshãshãwe.

to lift without effort, for an instant. herehetai.

to accompany, to go along with. peramokei.

they have blown on us (with the intention of making us flee). wãri horashikei ma re kuhahei.

to blow repeatedly (durative, plural acts). horashimai.

the fish did not delay in jumping out of the water and also it can be The word 'yetu' in Yanomami means 'child'. yetu yuri ke ki homoma.

he did not take long to start climbing the Poncha mountain. yetu ke a kãi yãmoo re kuketayonowehei.

the tobacco grew very quickly and flowered. yetu re nahe ha patarini, a raroma (mit.

fish (plural). yetu.

the placentas of the children (that he ate) awakened his cannibal hunger. ihiru re pe no sikini the naiki shurukou ha kutaruni.

placenta. no siki.

les voy a romper de verdad el omóplato a con el talón de un hacha. hãyokomani pemaki pootopi wãri yahekiprai ha totihironi (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

shoulder blade. poroapi.

an enormous anaconda was rising on its back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei (mit.

back, lower back muscles. huumotho.

at a moderate pace, neither fast nor slow. opihi o: a un ritmo moderado, ni rápido, ni lentamente.

at a moderate pace. opihi.

they retroceded on their steps. pe he re tatoprariyoheriiwei.

they retroceded/went back on their steps. tatoprariyoheriiwei.

(upriver speech). fapokawe shiﬁ.

upriver speech. fapokawe.

to hang cotton fibers to dry. shinari uku rukekai.

to hang cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry them. rukekai.

to be completely wrinkled, crumpled or soft. wãpretewe.

to be soldered, stuck together (elongated objects). hohãthãwe.

they excavated in a place where the monster's lair was narrow. hepisiope ha the ka tiyei shoaomahe.

they excavated in a place where the monster. hepisiope.

are the neighboring people/persons/relatives the ones who killed my relative. yaﬁtherimi the kini ipa thora a teai pea ma ta kurahewe.

people/persons/relatives. yaﬁtherimi.

"now that things are barely perceptible (in the dark), we will get lost", we say. pei inaha the wai waroshoo tehe pemaki yakeriheri, yamaki ha kuni.

to be barely perceptible in the dark. waroshoo.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

having crushed, having softened with the hand. hushikiãrei.

it is at the bottom (it is below). kohomo hami.

below, underneath, at the bottom. o-.

to be angry. kokashi.

to split longitudinally. ekoko.

I offer many objects. pruka ya mavohipi tikreai.

to offer many objects (during a commercial transaction). ikre.

the great worms were tapping against the wall. horema ke the pe pata hipihipipraroma.

they were tapping against the wall. hipihipipraroma.

that the demons of bitterness fall to the ground, since you want to make me kill. hei a pitha re praope, a koãmiri prerei ma yaio mapei ha, ware niya sheamai ta ayaoyo.

people of supernatural beings associated with bitterness. koãmiri.

to have slid down (perfective of the inchoative). yohorayou.

oruga (no identificado (animal, planta)) de pelo urticante. shiãhomi.

to dull the edge of an instrument. namo tãihiãm ã i.

to dull the edge of an instrument. tãihiãm.

despite everything I managed to finish the roof. yaa ya si oa yãshimarema.

to do/achieve something despite difficulties. yãshimarema.

the stream is narrow. u makosi.

the people upriver use such narrow loincloths that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

narrow, tight. makosi.

to stain or spot partially. hayapisiai.

to act brave, puffing out one. akehe.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to shoot many arrows at a target without hitting it. tishikaihe.

Did you uncover the tobacco plants when you went to the garden. hikari hami waheki huu tehe pee wahe naheki he karorarema.

to uncover, remove the covering leaves from transplanted tobacco plants. karorarema.

he turned his head back abruptly towards his daughter. pe thee ke iha a mi yapaprakekirioma.

to turn one. yapakei.

to cover oneself with dew. hemaãhupiãi.

we are shooting arrows at it. kamiye pemakini pema a niyapraai.

we, us (emphatic plural pronoun). pemakini.

we will all return together. prewe pemaki kope.

to return, to go back. kope.

swollen. hinchado.

to impregnate a woman, said in the same way. shipenam a i.

to become pregnant. shipena.

prolonged cracking sound. krininimo.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into smaller pieces repeatedly to eat it. makosiamai.

go quickly to see what that unknown noise is. ei yai ke the ã re kui, ei ke the ta mipraohe.

to check out something quickly. mipraohe.

he got pricked by thorns while walking through a very dense area. paimi hami a huu tehe a misikipirariyoma.

got pricked by thorns. misikipirariyoma.

I will sharpen the stick. ya hi namo yakekeprarei.

to sharpen (plural objects). yakekerarei.

to arch the lower back. mi ipresitou.

to arch the lower back. mi ipresi.

you will become heavy again (= the hekura will return to lodge in your body). wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

you will become heavy again. kopariyonowei.

to be slightly tensed. karerehe.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short stick. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short stick. horotoweni.

they found fallen fruits on the ground. rua ke mo hiraa ha tarariheni.

fruits. rua.

to become beautiful (end of process). riyeheprou.

terminative suffix for intransitive verbs implying a gradual transformation. pro.

leaves (of different trees). yãã henape.

ritual of alliance between two or more communities, which consists of scattering the embers and lit ashes of the domestic fires, throwing them at each other and throwing themselves to the ground, to demonstrate their valor. hãohãomayou.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to reach the summit, to move along a summit. matoto.

to mix with people from another community. tikurua.

the dead were many, but he made them be reborn (lit: he made their breaths come out again). yãnomãmi pruka pe nomawe ma kui, pe mishiãki hamai kooma.

to make exit or enter, to give birth, to make sprout. hapramai.

I will go to look for powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make something cylindrical or approximately round pivot or rotate on itself, making it describe less than a half turn. hãmoriã.

habla de río arriba. sikro.

He left his arrow feathering work to offer him a tobacco quid. p ee nahe e ha hipekini, shereka a he re huhekeiwei.

1. To get rid of something, abandon something (in a specific place). 2. To temporarily abandon a task.. huhemakei.

that is approaching. the aheai.

to approach (beginning of a process). aheai.

noise. weke.

barely red. manashi momihiwe.

clear. fmanashi.

manner of shouting that. korereamo.

leaves (of different trees). yãã henape.

to raise the eyelid and fold it to look for something irritating the eye. mamo kasi ikekeai.

to raise the eyelid and fold it to look for something irritating the eye. mamo kasi ikeke.

to call out (incomplete aspect). komiãi.

to call out, to shout. komi.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

to bend, curve, twist. horeprou.

your hands stink. wa imiki ni feweri.

to stink. feweri.

the cacao trees hung down due to the burning heat. pohoro ke hiki wai teihia ha yaiparuni, pei ke the heyoshini.

to hang down, to incline. heyoshini.

to attach feathers to an arrow. shereka he haopei.

the man was lying in his hammock attaching feathers to arrows. yãnomãmi shereka a he haomai kãi peritioma.

to attach feathers to an arrow. haopei.

the cresta del paují is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to bristle (hair or feathers of an animal). mãririprou.

when she walked at a certain distance from the others, a jaguar appeared. a huu prihãtou hoo tehe, ira ke a petariyoma.

to walk at a certain distance from others. prihãtou.

I will look for it going around (the place). hei re ya the taeai ãyokãi totihio kuperei.

to go around (a place, an object). ãyoko.

to be about to have oneself painted with a curved line going from one ear to the other across the forehead. tiwaropramou.

you spend your time going up and down the watercourse (to come and steal cambures). rokomi wama ãsi pe nape hore mi wereweremou ma kui.

to go down a watercourse repeatedly, to be always going up and down a watercourse (with a specific purpose). wereweremou.

apresúrense en divertirse. pe iriamou ta haio she.

apresúrate a hacerlo. the ki ta thaprai ta hairo.

no me daré ninguna prisa en mostrarme. kamiye ya tapramou haio mai ke the.

él no se dio prisa para responder. a wã huo haionomi.

sal enseguida. a ta haa hairi.

¡que se haga rápido de día. the mi wãri harua ta hairiyo she.

to do something quickly. haipo.

I crushed (intentionally) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to step on, to crush an object by stepping on it. katika.

to make war. na wa.

to scratch oneself with an object. hikekeo.

he climbed back up and initiated the last part of his ascent. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma.

initiated the last part (of an ascent or journey). poushukurayou.

to wear out a little. rurohoprou.

to break the shell of. poshoamou.

to divide, split, distribute in several parts. pashihai.

gather here. eyeha pe ta hiraiku.

they have just gathered near here, on the summit. hesika ha ke pe hiraa ahetepeyoruu kuhe.

to gather, to assemble, to group together. hiraiku.

(member). harihiprou.

put feathers on those verada stems so that they become arrows and give them to me (placing them on the ground). wama e ki fe fa okãni, ke ki ta pramahe.

arrows. okãni.

a jaguar almost devoured us. irani wamareki mori waaprai kuhe.

the jaguar dragged the dead woman while the child was perched on a tree. irani suwe ke a nomawe re shaireheriiwei, ihiru a ma tikeo tehe.

jaguar. irani.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to make war. tishikãyou.

the old woman of dark complexion, after they threw her into the water, transformed into a guabina fish. patayoma the rii re potepionowei, pe ha kemapariheni, a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

to have a dark complexion, to be dark. potepionowei.

throw me the loincloth. wayuko ta sheyepa.

he threw the small bird to the woman. suwe ke iha hãshimo a sheyekema.

to sow by throwing seeds, to throw an object to someone, to violently throw an object to break it. sheyeai.

having dirtied multiple objects. shamirariyo.

we will all return together. prewe pemaki kope.

to return, to go back. kope.

as I am a Waika my head does not have bumps. waika ya kutaeni ya he wãri orãpi mai.

protuberance, swelling, lump, cyst, bump. orãpi.

the Yanomami mix malefic substances with the soil of footprints and are always pronouncing people's names. pe the pe rarapraihe, yãnomãmi, wa the pe hore peyeprai si ihehea ha.

to mix a malefic substance with the soil of a footprint to make the owner sick or kill them; to cast a magic substance towards someone. rarapraihe.

null. parahiri.

to take a portion of hunted meat (or fish) for oneself, detaching it in this way. tapan.

to become slippery (inside of an object) (perfective). takrarayou.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. wãrãhãnã.

she put the cassava bread to dry. fiki ha shirikiparini.

cassava bread. fiki.

to slap (oneself or someone else) once. pairei.

parasite (installed under the skin) that already has a certain size. ﬁfu.

I arrived after sunset. weyahawe ya kopema.

sunset, nightfall. weyahaw.

to eviscerate. peheri.

bejuco (unidentified vine/plant). shiporitama.

he returned angry (speech from the south of the Orinoco). nojado; a hushuoripi kãi kopeherima (habla del sur del Orinoco.

angry. nojado.

tree that has slid on its stump without falling. fhi tihea.

tree that slides on its stump without falling after being cut (usually gets caught on other trees). tihei.

the plants of cañas para flecha (arrow canes) sprouted scattered and the tucanes fell in love with them. shereka shororowe e siki ha kuruni mayepi peni shereka ki nohi toamahe.

it is planted spaced apart. the tia no shororowe.

dispersed, scattered. shororowe.

to march slowly (reciprocal). kawehayou.

the váquiros escaped immediately, being accompanied by Sherekanawe. ware ke ki tokua shoarayoma, sherekanawe a rurureherima.

1. To pile up, place objects on top of each other or inside each other; to hang two hammocks one above the other. 2. To offer someone two objects at once. 3. To exchange, barter (an object). 4. To be accompanied by someone during a journey.. ruruai.

to be about to cover one. horoipramou.

he was lost, when he saw Cachicamo on the path. a ha mohoruruni, moro ke a tarareherima.

he/she/it saw him/her/it. tarareherima.

when he had eaten all the bones produced by the cremation, Espíritu-luna crawled away. oshohore ke ki hititiarei yaro, periporiwe ke a pata hãmorimou ha shoaparuni.

all of them climbed, all ascended with difficulty. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

to move by crawling or dragging oneself on the ground; to climb with difficulty. hãmorimou.

cacique bird (yellow-backed or red-backed). frãrewei.

to place, sinking it, a bamboo tip into the shaft of an arrow. frahaka theiaprai.

to place, sinking a bamboo tip into the shaft of an arrow. theiaprai.

the pot has been placed crookedly (it is tilted or unstable). toutami si kayarea.

to put something crooked, to place something in an unstable position. kayareamai.

brother-in-law, when they are in flower, come down from the mountain and come to eat. shoriwe ke ki rarou yaio tehe, shoriwe ke ki pe mi ta wereparu.

they flower. rarooprou.

(he/she) responds immediately. wã hai puhi yoprakei.

to respond immediately (when questioned or criticized). yoprakei.

Shapokonayoma sat down next to me farting: "don't dirty my nostrils", I told him then. shapokonayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, shia keyeher o m a: "yare hiyokaki shamiãmai tikootihe", ya kutariyoma.

Shapokonayoma sat down next to me farting. shapokonayoma.

(related word). shãroko.

it does not give colic to women (when offering them honey to eat). suwe pe shuumou marihe.

to have colic. shuumou.

then don't do anything repugnant. wa the pe shami thai tikoo mai.

to do something dirty, to do something repugnant or impure, to commit incest. shami thai.

as they climbed a steep rock, Kasimi had vertigo. pei maki ha pe ha yãmothoni, kasimi a shi kirihoma.

to have vertigo, to be dazzled. kiriﬁ.

do not bathe here, do it farther away. miha a yãrimotihe, thapi ha ke wa yãr i m o p e.

farther away. yãrimotihe.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with dry leaves or plant residues. heshãheshãpirayou.

to germinate, to sprout from the earth. kaup.

to form a blister/blisters on the hand. fimiki si posho.

to form blisters. poshokei.

arrow with bamboo point. makepou mi pao thare ke.

arrow. makepou.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to rise to the surface of the water (bubbles). poririai.

to mix, stir, blend. tikura.

to separate, to divide for a moment. sheteketou.

he has the intention of coming to attack me with magic plants, that one with the eyes dotted with spots. ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei, mamo pe wãri re tipikiini.

to paint a circle on one. tipikio.

to be inferior (plural object). hawehea.

I am afraid. yeimi naki.

to be afraid. yeimi.

she was dancing on the sand. mrakatahu ke a ha.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksands attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

sand, sandy beach. mrakatahu.

to kill someone with a harpoon arrow. ãtãri ãhiprai.

to never renounce a revenge or aggression. puhi asimoimi.

to never renounce a revenge or aggression. asimoimi.

to present the head to receive a blow (in a duel with clubs). repei.

when the girl who had her first period came out, the ground softened. yipi ke the waweprou re ayarayouwei, pitha a epehewe kuprariyoma.

when the girl who had her first period came out (of the shelter where she was confined). ayarayouwei.

to start frying, roasting, toasting. ãrikiprai.

to bear several dents or concave marks in various places. wãhihiwe.

to change direction one after another. akepraai.

to return on one. yaparayou.

to be the first to do something. shomãrãyou, perf.

to be the first to do something. shomãrãyou.

I drove away the hekura with the smell of burnt meat (smoking). hekura ya pe yashua totihirei, yaro pe ni ishirini.

to smell burnt. ishirini.

go over there to cook the váquiro. ware a ta tukutuhe.

to cook (something) over there. tukutuhe.

to become completely wrinkled, flabby or crumpled (locally). wãpreteprou.

lie down in your hammock. warapawe yaweroope, wa pe maikaprari.

lie down. maikaprari.

to have a palpitating stomach. fãmoku preipreiw e.

to have a palpitating stomach. preipreiw.

1. to crackle, to sputter 2. to pass rapidly. shãishãi.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically (perfective). imiki yokorayou.

we regrouped and threw ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to fall or slide into water, to dive, to throw oneself down a slope. nihoromaparei.

small deer; Mazama sp. (Cervidae). koshikoshirimi.

relation of father-in-law or mother-in-law to son-in-law. thatheye.

hurry to take off the objects that belong to you. mihi matohihe pe ta hayua ta haire.

to stay behind. heaai.

they do not inform me. yare nowã thapouimihe.

they do not inform me. thapouimihe.

fohi himou: to manifest that one is hungry. fohi himou: manifestar que se tiene hambre.

hunger. naiki.

to paint transverse lines on the body. tiprutuo.

path/trail situated behind a dwelling. nohãmiprou.

The Hypoclinea bidens ant is small. Õkohãma resi ã huu.

Hypoclinea bidens (Dolichoderinae). okohãma.

to crush by pressing. huthemiprai.

to crush by pressing. huthemi.

only small fragments fell to the ground. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

fragments, crumbs, splinters. peoma.

it was him who kept my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to keep an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kaokoaparei.

to fall ill due to wãrihotho. t wãrihothoãi.

to fall ill due to wãrihotho. wãrihotho.

to take someone aside to give them information that is meant to be kept secret. makokoaprai.

to break an object by throwing it against the ground. yãthemiprai.

to start frying, roasting, toasting. ãrikiprai.

you do not tell lies (= what you say is true). hore kunomai wa wã.

not for a moment did it occur to him to think that the others were still in the jungle. urihi hami ai ke the wai huu tehe kunomai (mit.

to say, to tell. kunomai.

he kept the ant nest on the ground near him. konakona pe pesi prapou heweoma.

ant nest. heweoma.

tomorrow I will go hunting, I am tired of staying (here). henaha ya rãmi huatarotayope, ya kuo mohipraruhe.

I am tired of a situation, I have lost the desire to work, I am tired of a job. huatarotayope.

the tábanos (horseflies) have the sucking mouthpart flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to have the end completely flattened (elongated object, stick, etc.). tatahawe.

the cries of Woman-picu. Yãri yaherikeherima (mit.

the cries of Woman-picu. yaherikeherima.

as he heard the rain approaching, Horonãmi sought to dry himself. maa a hoã pata huimai ha horonãmi a wehemoma.

to dry, to evaporate. wehe.

they invited me again. yare nakapou koohe.

go, start following the path again. peihe, yo nosi ta poa koohe.

invited, solicited. koohe.

to acquire a name (to name). waheheai.

to blink several times in a row. misi yahoy a h o m o u.

to blink. yahoy.

to hang low. preyukuaai.

to go live separated from others. payekerayou.

they two isolated themselves from the others and painted their bodies. yãmi ke the kipi yãmou yawerea ha totiikuni.

to isolate oneself, to do something alone. totiikuni.

they pursued me in vain in this place, they tensed their bows. iha yare nosi hore poimamahe, pe the pe ma re iyohooperei.

tensed (a bow). iyohorei.

él llevó tizones. koa wake ki re tetaoheriiwei.

tizones (glowing embers). tetao.

to paint one's face. mi shopoho.

to dye/tint light red, to allow a fruit to ripen before consuming it, to authorize a young woman to leave the space where she was confined after her first menstruation. shopoho.

they organized a funerary banquet. e pouku re koamaiwehei.

they organized a funerary banquet. koamaiwehei.

Why are they inviting me. ware nakapou ma ta sihewe.

dubitative modality. hewe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). yãpimowe.

(speaks of upriver) and also it can be The word 'shereka' in Yanomami means 'arrows'. shereka a sho pema mo teﬁape.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. siki re shoririmore.

arrow. shereka.

go to see, examine. miã.

to heal; to stop. yokeke.

to be hanging or suspended in the void. mi kayahawe.

to be hanging or suspended in the void. kayahawe.

to protect oneself by placing a defensive fence. hikoromou.

to protect oneself by placing a defensive fence. hikoro.

tomorrow you will give me a gift. h enaha yare huko sheyeape.

to offer, to give as a gift. weye.

your bodies do not give off the odor of onoto. nana wama e ki ni patheo ma re maohe ke.

exhale, give off (odor). patheo.

it goes down (the level of a water stream). u terereai.

to go down (the level of a water stream). tetere.

tree that has, naturally, many folds. turarawe.

having, naturally, many folds. turara.

he cut a short stick and put it in the prolongation (of a branch). horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tikemakema.

put in the prolongation (of a branch). tikemakema.

to nibble the lower lip. fkasiki wetiwetimou.

to nibble the lower lip. wetiwetimou.

the yawari made her walk in front of them and thus they reached a savanna. yawari peni a pararupouhe tehe, pirisi a hami a kãi hoã waroa mahikemahe.

to make someone walk in front of one; to guide someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child). pararupouhe.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepiai.

stay calm, be quiet, why do you have to keep gathering, first in one place, then in another, to speak ill (of others). mamikai ke pe ta kuo, weti wama the pe wãhã hore thai kãi yototoaprarou.

to gather, to meet, to group together. yototoai.

she tore her clothes, hiding her private parts (lit. ihiru e kipi pesi ha kakaprarini, omawe ke kipi hitheprai shoarayoma.

to hide several objects. hitheprai.

to offer, to give as a gift. iweye.

to extend, to spread out (in surface area). hauhuprou.

the noise the little one was making could be heard: he was really nursing. ihiru ke a wai kruikruimou yaioma.

to produce a noise each time a sip of liquid is swallowed; the sound a baby makes when nursing. kruikruimo.

to have a foot pain (from a blow or injury). yutukou.

to move along the visible side of an elevation (when previously on the non-visible side, in relation to the place one is going). parikiprou.

to move along the visible side of an elevation. parikiprou.

the Waika had gone to war (and someone said): "Paint your faces black. waika pe wayu ha aruherini: "pe mi ta hiriko sho. ". ".

to smear one. hirikou.

to tie a hammock by tensioning it too much. kashesheai.

I am not a child. ihiru ke ya ma re mai.

Vocative used by an elder to address young people. fihiru pe, ihiru pewe.

Soon I will engender a child. ya ihirupi thao ropaope.

Your son will be brave (lit: you will give birth with pain). wa ihirupi wayuope.

child, boy. fihiru.

he carried the dog on his back. hiima ke a yehireherima.

since Hewethawe was blind, they had the custom of carrying him on the back using the hammock ropes. hewethawe a huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki hami.

(example incomplete). sipara ke a pata shutukahe yehirema.

to carry on the back. yehireherima.

"Where is my loincloth part. "weti ipa napeyoma ke a. Did you tear yours into two strips (to offer me one). wa siki sheririprarihawe. ". ".

to tear or rip lengthwise into two pieces. sheririprai.

to participate in a ceremonial dialogue. wayamou.

to participate in a ceremonial dialogue. wayamo.

the demon of the quicksands dragged him to the bottom of its hole. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei.

to put something at the bottom or inside (perfective form). shomikei.

quickly, he hung the hammock he was carrying in the open air, and lay down for a while. thoo thoku re yehiponowei the ki ha hakokotakini a peritaoma.

hung (a hammock) in the open air. yehiponowei.

to sharpen two utensils by rubbing them together. namo yakekeai.

to sharpen two utensils by rubbing them together. yakekeai.

I gather only a part of the fruits. himohimo ya ki ayaai.

Make fruits fall. himohimo ki ta kemari.

fruit. himohimo.

you will come to me to beg for tobacco. pee nahe pe ha kamiye ke iha wa nakouwe.

to beg, to ask for. nakouwe.

she accompanied Tucán to his house. mayepiriwe ke e yahi hami a nokarema.

to accompany. mayepiriwe.

to produce pots. urere.

to become less and less visible in the dark. warosho.

trepar a un. mamiki waporo.

climb. waporo.

to bend an object in several places. toyekamai.

they (they two) made the woman work telling her to grate manioc. nashi hi ha suwe a ohotamopii re shoatariyowei.

they made her work grating manioc. ohotamopii.

come here to blow the fire. koa wake ta horapayo.

come here to blow the fire. horapayo.

as soon as she arrived she sat in the hammock at the side of her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

at the side of. kopohoroni.

to be constantly going back and forth despite being extremely thin (jokingly). mi shoeshoeãprarou.

to become thin, to lose weight. mi shoeke.

to finish dirtying or staining something. shamipramai.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to line up, to crouch in a line one next to the other. rãyo.

estos frutos están realmente muy dulces. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

sweet. kretetio.

he untied the hammock (that he was carrying on his back), and lay down. yii theki a ha kusherini a perioma.

he is lying in a cotton hammock. yii ke ki ha a peria kure.

hammock. kusherini.

to be hungry. warahokoma.

small freshwater crab. hewashimi.

to be rigid, to be stiff. hirarawe.

to make love. wamo.

they (two) produced shavings in the ceiba wood, and these transformed into many bocón fish and hatate. mahe siki re yakekapiiwei mãrohã, hatate pe pruka kuprou shoaoma.

They produced shavings/chips. yakekapiiwei.

they ruin the effect of the hallucinogens. epena ke a wayu wãriãi kutuhei.

ruin, destroy the effect of. kutuhei.

I'm better now, my health continues improving little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to finish improving after an illness; to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). hereheprou.

I was moving away a lot. ya payekama.

to move away quickly. payekai.

the jaguar tore off the dog's head with its teeth. irani hiima ke he wahetiprai ha kuparuni (mit.

to extract part of something, to cut off the end of something with the teeth. wahatho.

we advanced along the river. yamaki hiriroherii, para u sipo hami.

to coast, to move along, to advance following the bank of a stream. hirirou.

confused noise. sharai.

Onomatopoeia. shara.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

encounter. encuentro.

that the demons of bitterness fall to the ground, since you want to make me kill. hei a pitha re praope, a koãmiri prerei ma yaio mapei ha, ware niya sheamai ta ayaoyo.

people of supernatural beings associated with bitterness. koãmiri.

precisely in this place the shelters did not bode well (for our expedition), one of them broke suddenly. iha hãto nahi hapa horihiãmorayou, nahi keprakei.

an event that is interpreted as a bad omen during a war expedition (a shelter that collapses, an explosion of wood in the fire, a hammock rope that breaks, a dream of a jaguar killed by men, etc.); also applied to the behavior of a sick animal without apparent cause, believed to be sent by enemies as a trick to make someone who touches the animal sick or die. horihiãmou.

the two shapono (baskets) are one next to the other. shapono pe he tipetea.

the ancestor Monos capuchinos were seated one next to the other. e naha hoashiri ke pe he tipetea ha kuparuni (mit.

to be placed or located one next to the other (for low, rounded objects). tipete.

encima de la roca yacía una tragavenado. pei ke maki heaka hami hokoto keki re waririonowei.

hizo caer la tragavenado muerta al agua. mãrewa hokoto keki pata nomawe nihoroã shoamaparema.

tragavenado, Boa constrictor (Boidae). hokoto.

it fragments, it breaks into pieces. remakashiai.

to fragment, to break into pieces. remakashi.

he blew a magical substance at him. tahiapini a horaprai parioma.

to blow a magical substance at someone. tahiapini.

to get one's face painted. mi yakirao.

to get one. yakirao.

to have multiple blisters. thorohorariyo.

when we address each other, we only use the term ãi. yahe e ki ãiãprao totihio.

to say ãi (term for older male relative) many times in succession. ãiãprao.

estar siempre riéndose, reírse varias veces seguidas. ikãoprou.

to laugh. ikã-.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to crush, to grind, to soften with the hand (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). hushikikei.

they send their hekura against Titiri. titiri a hapeihe.

to send one. hapei.

to be few (after having been many). horohoprou.

to turn over an eyelid (by playing). mamo kasi yoreai.

to turn over, to turn inside out. yore.

Baba kept the fire inside his mouth (to hide it). iwariweni a wake hopoma.

the shaman spat out the plant (from which a jaguar was born). hekurani ira hena hoprarema.

to vomit, to spit out, to regurgitate. wei.

as he had returned home enraged, he left the package (that was cooking on the embers) to burn. a hushuoripi ha koponi, e hãro ishimarema.

left to burn. ishimarema.

to partially fill or empty (multiple objects), durative. hayaromai.

to harden. monono.

when the woman's belly exploded, the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to cut into several pieces, to chop. tipurai.

he gave the turn to the dwelling, examining all the hearths. orea ha hititiapotuni.

examining all. hititiapotuni.

to pass rapidly. shãishãiãi.

to begin to surpass (in height). hetorehe.

he has the intention of coming to attack me with magic plants, that one with the eyes mottled with dots. ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei, mamo pe wãri re tipikiini.

mottled, speckled, decorated with dots. tipikiini.

1. To put to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. 2. To tell someone to dry, to start smoking.. tetekeamai.

there the váquiros (a type of bird) gather in large numbers. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

to fill up to the brim; to become numerous. manikiprou.

to be hardened, twisted, deformed locally. tosheshea.

bully. paretomi.

she is my mother, I call her mother. naye ke a, kama ke iha ya napemou.

to call someone mother, to be related as mother and child. napemou.

Tortuga took out an especially dangerous bamboo point. rahaka ãiãmo: tomi pe mamiki ha hararuni (mit.

especially dangerous bamboo point. hararuni.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yãnomãmi have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to perforate, to pierce by repeatedly pressing with the hand (a long and pointed object); to inject, to give an injection. hiwehekei.

we have intentions of attacking them in any case. yama the pe niya shurukai he ha yatiokirini.

to attack them in any case. yatiokirini.

when the day dawned, when the dawn began to break. pe the misi wakakaai tehe, wawetomi wapoko.

to be slightly open, to be slightly ajar. hoshoko.

treahumu: to participate in a banquet of that kind. treahumu: participar en un banquete de ese tipo.

to participate in a banquet. treahumu.

to be angry. oyokorema.

Gallito hormiguero de cara negra los hizo reir al manchar el rostro de los Hombres con sus deyecciones. hiyomarithaweni ke a ikãã re totihimareiwei, yãnomãmi the moheki ha shiipimarini.

to cause to do something. mare.

the path is branched. yo rãikiwe.

to be branched, to run through several separate beds. rãikiwe.

colorful crest of certain birds. huko shopapi.

colorful crest (of certain birds). shopapi.

why don't you ever want to go to the forest. weti ke the ha wa huu mohio shiroãi.

to have desire, to want. mohio.

on all the tree trunks against which he had smeared his bloodied penis, transverse stains were visible. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe.

he had smeared it by rubbing or applying something to it. hãhioheripe.

she insulted him. suweni a yahatuai nokaa shoapariyoma.

to insult, to offend by publicly proclaiming someone. nokaa.

Move away, my little one. oãsi, a ta payekeiku.

to move away for a while (e.g. to avoid a prohibited relative). payekeprao.

llevar una piel de ave en el sima lóbulo de cada oreja. siki reikimapou.

lobe of each ear. sima.

to be a little short. fhorotoho.

to do (tobacco) quickly. tihirutihirutai.

to be beautiful, splendid (durative). wãrishanai.

I was bitten by many mosquitoes. ukushi peni yare mi watherema.

as dawn did not come, they exhausted the firewood to warm themselves. the pe he haruprarou ha maoni koã ãsho pe mi watherema.

consumed entirely, exhausted. watherema.

the pueblo of the bees then gathered on the celestial disk. hetu misi hami puu nari pe urukuprou re shoarayouwei.

to gather in large quantities. urukupramai.

to flow into. nohãmiãi.

when the speaker is at home during the day (to do something). wakaraprou.

the great rock began to oscillate. pei maki pata opi raitou waikioma.

oscillate. raitou.

your brother-in-law. ouwehe.

they prepared gourds, as they intended to consume pijiguao porridge on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

the Ugly One (Baba) returned home. a wãri koã kopema.

to prepare, divide, reduce to powder/ashes, smooth the shaft of an arrow, carve bamboo tips. kopema.

The man kept tightening Siroromi vigorously. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

1. To keep tightening or compressing forcefully. 2. To keep eyes closed. 3. To extinguish (a fire).. ãkikou.

(he) climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honey nests that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi".

to climb a very tall tree to get oriented. yapepraai.

eyebrow. weAnat.

I am really worried about those two. ya kipi nohi haruhupou totihio.

to feel concern for someone, to fear for someone. haruhuprai.

that no one remain behind. ai pe huu heparuhe.

remain. quede.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

when dawn broke, he quickly withdrew his penis (from the woman he was making love to). the uheheprou tehe the moroshi uketareiwei.

to approach/come near quickly. uketareiwei.

he remained in the tree until dawn and, being prudent, he controlled that the tree did not tremble. ha re the tikrea he haruma, a ha moyaweoni the hi tiikou mima.

to tremble (an object), to vibrate, to oscillate. moyaweoni.

(he) tied together the legs of the tapir (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie together the front and hind legs of an animal to carry it on one. warea.

they (the two of them) intend to attend (the cremation of the body) and will surely arrive late. ke kipi mamo niya ha shationi ke kipi huu hea ma re kui.

to observe, watch, attend. mamo shati.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with the molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

to crush or grind something partially with the molars, to chew food in that way. watikai.

calm down. a ta waikitaru.

calm down. waikitaru.

in every place where he had dried his bleeding penis against the trees, there were red lines marked. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami hiki tiprutuwe.

to dry by rubbing against something. hãhio.

I ask you please to ambush (= to arm your bows) at the front of the path. mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripakirihe she e.

the front part, the part of the path leading away from the dwelling, the head of a group moving in a line. paripakirihe.

the pain prevented him from moving. no wãri kiwema mai.

to be unable to move due to pain. kuwema.

Space that is freed. yakeai.

to begin to grow large (a tobacco plant). kumamasiãi.

he returned directly to his house. a shariria korayoherima, kama pe yahipi hami.

he/she/it returned directly home; they left together. korayoherima.

small freshwater crab. hewaruhumi.

a snake and also it can be The word 'oru' in Yanomami means 'snake'. oru ke ki.

snake. oru.

to overtake someone from both the right and left at the same time. yakaromai.

to take a piece, a part, for oneself (of a flat and round object, of a cassava bread). ayakosirarei.

to paint several objects white. pintar de blanco varios objetos.

to paint. pintar.

my father-in-law. siyoha.

on the slope of a hill or mountain. ftiwaro ha (mi).

we arrived at the other slope. ai the tiwaro ha yamaki re pareyoruuwei.

to be situated on the contour of a hill or mountain. ftiwaro.

sin. awe.

I slightly cut the bark of the ayukuma trees (to peel them). ayukuma ya hi tikekamai.

to slightly prick the bark with the tip of a sharp object and lift it to be able to grab it with the hand and remove it from the trunk. tikekai.

when you clear the overgrown part of the garden, the thorns of the kãmoãrima plant will scratch you and make you bleed. wamaki yasikope hami kãmoãrima peni wamaki i yepe rukekotii kukei.

a plant with thorns or spines. kãmoãrima.

to shorten a bamboo arrowhead. pookosikei.

to show oneself, make oneself known; to expose oneself, to go defiantly to a community where one has been threatened. taamou.

To suffer from a stomach ache. ãmoku nini: sufrir del estómago.

To suffer from (stomach ache). ãmoku ninimou: padecer de.

stomach ache. ãmoku nini.

cachicamo. yoroahirimi.

when Yoawe saw the woman, he turned into a rock partridge to catch her. yoaweni suwe a taprai tehe, a niya ha huweani, a hore ehoãmi unaprou shoaoma.

One of the two demiurges, elder brother of Õmawe. In the different myths where he intervenes, he plays the role of deceiver.. yawetiwe.

to accompany, to follow a person. nosi yukei.

the sexually excited monkeys capuchins rejoiced. hoashiri ke pe peshiri puhi topraroma (mit.

sexually excited. topraroma.

the váquiros are detained (one after another). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were numerous rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be stopped/detained (plural subject). fhothotho.

the stream is narrow. u makosi.

the people upriver use such narrow loincloths that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

narrow, tight. makosi.

to swirl, make whirlpools (water). horahoratou.

to untangle. kateherei.

to make someone give up. puhi remomai.

I will scratch you a lot. pe iprushimararei.

to scratch, to claw. prushima.

I will cover the wapu fruits with water (while they are cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to cover with water a food that is cooking. paopei.

to make a fire. oroshoshoomi.

Titiri flapped his wings to (make fall) his parasites. titiri pei ke nomapi re yahuhuprouwei (mit.

to flap wings in one place, to flap wings without flying (a bird). yahuhuprouwei.

to cause someone to startle. ãtipramai.

upriver speech. kai hesi.

me voy a bañar. ya yãrimou.

me voy a hacer pintar líneas si-. ãiwe ke iha ya oni eyekamou.

past completed form. morãyoma.

you have not answered their request. wamaki wã huo mãopere.

you have not answered their request. mãopere.

1. he paroho he piye 1 vb. intr. to fall seriously ill. ye.

curare (poisonous plant extract). curare.

to boast, to speak boastfully. noka hekai.

to boast, to speak boastfully. hekai.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

inform, warn, advise, notify. yimirã.

mother-in-law, however my brother-in-law ate all the wapu fruits (while you suppose that they are not yet ripe). yape, shoriweni wapu ke ki nohi waa waikireiwei.

all the fruits. waikireiwei.

do not tell me what others say and do. kamiye iha pe ã pakihatihe.

do not tell me what others say and do. pakihatihe.

to terminate, to end, to be blunt. koho.

he went to look for worms in a place where rocks rise up. maa ke mape hothopramope hami kohoromi e shipe torarema.

a place where rocks rise up. hothopramope.

put an injection (perfective). tiweherei.

to put an injection. tiwehei.

he has woken me up. yare hushurema.

to wake someone up. hushurema.

you have been pregnant, soon your belly will grow. wa shipenarayoma hei tehe wa maka isipariyo (mit.

stomach, belly. maka.

ya reconocí la planta de los y a w a r i. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena no ihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a no ihip ia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo no i hi pia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. iai.

a concave mark (due to a fold, a blow or pressure). wãhihikei.

to wrinkle. arrugarse.

to trace a cross over several objects. yakiraakei.

to walk ahead for a while. oratamakei.

they paint their bodies and cover their heads with white down. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to have covered one. horoimopei.

they placed a platform high up, and climbed onto it (to ambush). isi ha kana ãki ha thapikini a nohi tikepopima.

small platform made of parallel sticks tied with crosspieces, fixed to a tree for hunters to ambush certain animals. thapikini.

they killed their younger brother/sister. pe ai pe sheremahe.

as they wanted to take his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

they killed him/her/it. sheremahe.

speech of upriver. huroko.

(related word). shiu.

the river is rising. u petii.

to be full, to be satisfied (perfective form). petirayou.

to perforate, to make a hole, to open a package. horoshokei.

I forgave you (but I have not forgotten). pe nohi asipou poo.

to have forgiven. asipou.

person to perform acts of black magic. perpenuna.

there where the giant cachicamo is, in its den, I will asphyxiate it (with smoke) and cook it. waka a re titirati, ya mishi ha tumaparini, ya wãri ta ripia.

to drown (in water); to asphyxiate an animal in its den with smoke. tumaparei.

to be happy. yoririmi.

put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke a ta hiimahe.

put tips on arrows. hiimahe.

the pots are closed (by means of lids). hapoka si pe ka he kahuprawe.

closed (plural objects). kahuprawe.

to touch once. tiprushiai.

I possess a lot of tobacco, but the plants are small. yetu yuri re pe hãupraa totihia ma kure.

a piapoco is crouched near the ground. yahatoto hami ke a roa kure.

low, near the ground. hãupraa.

filled up to the brim (a basket). iyekeprou.

to have a furuncle. piai.

to have a furuncle. piai.

give me a bamboo arrow point, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to give to someone an object received from another. torekei.

they discovered the sorcerers painted in black, swollen and scattered on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe, pe shuweoma.

swollen, inflated, dilated. shuweoma.

ay, our voices sink under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

the turtle retracted its head (into its shell). totori ke pe he wahoa re totihipoti.

to slide along; to slip through the hands; to sink. wahokei.

to redden locally by the action of the sun. hetete.

light-colored, pale. ossólo.

the white arrows of the black chupacacao are covered with longitudinal lines. herãmi pe sherekapi au re shetitirahari.

to have a longitudinal line, a scratch. shetitia.

it gets dark. mi rumãhããi.

to darken, to get dark. rumãhããi.

do not lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

do not lie. nasimotihe.

Follow me, you will capture a small enemy (= follow me, you will kill an enemy). ware ke wa ihirupi huweape, a nosi ta yauiku.

to capture, to seize, to grab, to take possession of (a single object). huweape.

to soften/make soft several objects. fepehama.

you (pl. wamaki kunomi.

to say, to think. kunomi.

(habla de río arriba. hurari peni kayurifanari pe yashuprai re kupeherono- yatirawe henaki.

expulsar de ira, desalojar; rechazar al enemigo. kupeherono-.

to make a short bamboo arrowhead. pookosiprai.

to cause waves to spread onto the shore. pakayu.

(he) then transformed into a gray heron (lit. pasho re e si kuprou piyerayoma (mit. 'then he flew away as a gray heron'). ).

it flew away, it transformed. yerayoma.

to take each other by the arm. iri misi ipihi.

to take by the arm. ipihi.

to be capable of spitting magic plants or pathogenic objects. pehithepraai.

malaria. fura.

don't be afraid, wait a moment and let's talk. kiritihe, waiha, peheki ã ta wayo.

don. kiritihe.

the jaguar arrived where he was and raised his head. ira ke a ha waroikiyoni a mi nonokema.

he raised his head. nonokema.

I will go to look for powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make something cylindrical or approximately round pivot or rotate by half a turn. hãmoriprai.

"we will make the house again as it was before", they said. "e naha pema nahi thaa kopei", the pe kuprarou yaioma.

we (inclusive). pema.

sit down. a ta roiku.

sit down (southern Orinoco dialect). a ta roiki.

perfective aspect marker. ke.

to dawn. rohoroprou.

just when the sun is a little high in the sky is when we become generous. kihi ke mothoka kutou totihio tehe the pe shi ihite waroamai totihio.

to become generous, to have the desire to give. ihitaai.

lie down next to me. a ta yakaiku.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock. yaka.

todo el mundo sabe que soy matador de jaguares. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

I am a killer/hunter. niyatimi.

to smile. kasi wateai.

to smile. wateai.

to fear, to be afraid. horihipou.

me di cuenta de que le habías regalado vestimentas a la gente de Tokonawe. tokonawe theri pe rii ha wahe siki ma re hipeakenowe thai.

place name. Tokonawe.

to become numerous. yaharaai.

he feels jealous of his wife. pe suwepi a nohi harupou.

to feel lasting jealousy. harupou.

you can see that I have broken my arrow, I have repaired it by tying a fragment to the extension of the shaft. shereka ya ha keprarini ya he tikeparema ma re kui.

to repair a broken arrow by tying two pieces of cane end to end. tikeparema.

a creaking sound was heard when the earth began to split (lit. mashitha a hapa hetii tehe the krimou shoarayoma.

to creak. krimou.

"as for you, it seems you have let two gallinetas escape", we said. "hãshimo wama kipi he oa ayamarei ta kuhani", yamaki kuma.

1. To let prey or an enemy escape. 2. To demonstrate a person. he omai.

to fold, pleat (several times on itself) the edge of something, to make a hem on the edge of a fabric by making several folds. kohemai.

I am really worried about those two. ya kipi nohi haruhupou totihio.

to feel concern for someone, to fear for someone. haruhuprai.

we took a large quantity of verada stems. shereka yama he pe prewe teararema.

we gathered a large quantity of canes for making arrows. sheraka yama he pe teararema.

a large quantity, a great amount. teararema.

to become numerous. thethe.

He finished carrying a load. i una carga pashokoprou.

to finish carrying a load. pashokoprou.

to remove a thorn using a pointed object [misiki washai, durative, plural object]. fmisiki washeai.

to remove a thorn using a pointed object. fmisiki.

I will come without a doubt (talking about upriver). ya fuuwei ke the.

I will come without a doubt. fuuwei.

Did you remove the leaves covering the tobacco plants when you went to the field. hikari hami waheki huu tehe pee wahe naheki he karorarema.

to uncover, remove the covering. karomarei.

(speech from upriver). sirãmi.

domesticated ground dove. yakofe.

to possess objects in different parts. shetekepou.

he is already dead. a no prea waikia.

to be dead. prea.

crouch over there, I crouch over here. miha ke a ta yereiku, kiha kamiye ke ya yereo.

to crouch or be crouched, to be or get against the ground (with limbs gathered), to perch or be perched on the ground with legs gathered (a bird). yerekei.

to present marks of various impressions (the ground). kãshikiwe.

the sun advances, it approaches the horizon. kihi mothoka kuaai kure, pe the hiririwe ke, pe the hirirou totihia ke a kure.

to approach the horizon (celestial body). hiririãi.

the two sides of the face, the two cheeks. karemoku.

divide. repokosiai.

to be hungry. tokrekemi.

I have my hair cut. ya miki peamou.

to have one. peamou.

offer me hayakoari plant, when I am under its effect, I will see the face of the demons of war in the distance. hayakoari ke hena, henaki ta prapari, ihi ke henaki wayu ha ãiãmori pe re niyayope ya pe yãnopi he tharea.

face. niyayope.

more. más.

to become narrow, to close (a hole, opening, orifice). hokokei.

put yourself in the center. a mi ta thar i p r a r u.

to place oneself in the center when one was not there before, to place oneself for a moment in the center, to place oneself for a moment in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. tharitou.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

To go ashore, to disembark. hashiri-.

I didn't eat much honey, I just dipped something in it briefly to eat it. puu ya u pe wai he ononoo mai, wãisipi ya the wai ha otoototaakini.

to dip food in liquid to eat. otoai.

itheri vb. itheri vb. trans. trans. t itheriai: 1. t itheriai: 1. To add something on top of the load of a basket; to add an object to another that has just been offered, to give in addition. Añadir algo encima de la carga de una cesta; añadir un objeto a otro que se acaba de ofrecer, dar además.

to add. añadir.

they put cotinga skins in each other's ears, and slid parrot tail feathers under their armbands, they looked really beautiful. heimi ke pe ha huupiararini, kurikaya ke teshina pe ha makekeararini, riyehewe totihiwe ke kipi kuoma.

they put on (something) in their ears. huupiararini.

it is rough. the hupamou namo.

the hallucinogenic ayukuma has been finely ground. ayukuma a hupamou si uhutitiwe.

quality that a surface offers to the touch. hupamou.

pronoun. pronom-.

edible fruit of the guamo tree. krepo.

don't protest or I'll kill you. wã wãri thatihe, pe sherei.

to threaten, to warn. thatihe.

there are lightning flashes. the mi yãmimou.

to occur repeatedly (lightning). yãmiyãmimou.

let the children roll in the mud here. ihiru ke the pe wai sheyeo heai.

to roll on the ground, to throw oneself. sheyeo.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty of inhabitants (a dwelling, camp). roroko.

headdress of the hekura that resembles the feline wãshãema. watoshe wãshãema.

when I die (when my house is cold). yãno si ahio tehe.

when I die. yãno.

a type of plant from the Cyperaceae family with small, spherical bulbs used in magic, usually to bring luck in hunting certain animals. mamoki.

to be greedy (lit. fhoperiwe imiki re humipe.

to close the fist, to be greedy. humipe.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

to stagger, to totter. atateai.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into pieces several times to eat it. makosiamai.

to tear two narrow strips. makosiprai.

to narrow, to cut a narrow strip of something. makosiai.

spider web (upstream dialect). fãhãrãmãema.

to have the smell of excrement. fni shiipiri.

to have the smell of excrement. shiipiri.

he gave the turn to the dwelling, examining all the hearths. orea ha hititiapotuni.

he gave the turn. orea.

strabismus. priri .

to remain for a moment one against another. hohãthãprao.

to have made oneself painted with those lines. hahetimorãyou.

gavilán, ave de rapiña (Buteo sp). siehemi kiri hena.

the one who rubs himself with paint = the one who rolls in the mud. i ki re hirikope o hei ki re hirikore.

the one who rubs himself with paint. hirikope.

to have a slightly curved shape (termination). wãheteprou.

they put quickly to dry, roughly, chili peppers on the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke incompletely a game or fish prey; not to dry perfectly. weheroprou.

ayama: the Yanomami cassava flatbreads are made with two layers of flour on top of each other. ayama: las tortas de casabe yãnomãmi se hacen con dos capas de harina superpuestas. A flatbread is ayama when it still only has one layer. Una torta es ayama cuando todavía no tiene más que una sola capa.

I bake a cassava flatbread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

flatbread made from cassava. casabe.

to separate the edges of something (by burning it from the inside). hauhuprai.

do not sleep. pe miotihe.

I told them not to sleep. ya kutariyoma.

do not sleep. miotihe.

Translation:. raharaha henaki.

to climb up, to mount, to sit or squat on, to get into a canoe. tikeai.

perfect tense of tikeai and tikeo. tikekei.

to climb up, to mount, to sit or squat on, to get into a canoe. tike.

to be disconcerted, stunned; to be helpless. horihipramai.

I have intestinal worms. ya shiprupi.

to be infested with intestinal worms. shiprupi.

the ancestors found refuge under the cacao trees. pohoroa ana hiki ha patapi ke pe he ruo ta no kuperaheshini.

to find refuge. kuperaheshini.

to place two objects against each other. rahoakei.

we followed the watercourse downstream and discovered a large number of paujíes. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. werepekirio.

that unrolls as it falls, like a big turd. hawe shii the pata yorirou: eso se enrolla al caer, como un gran mojón.

it unrolls/unwinds slowly. yoririrayou.

to decorate an object or person by imprinting a hand painted with colorant (plural objects). raokoprawe.

The hekura can be male or female, they are naturally given the name "eternal" (pãrimi) since they are immortal. Los hekura pueden ser varones o hembras, se les da naturalmente el nombre de "eternos" (pãrimi) ya que son inmortales.

eternal. pãrimi.

the water hinders their advance but they set foot on land again. mau ke u ha a shi wãripariyo kuhe, a hashiria re kokeheriiwei.

we set foot on land, we immediately set off, and our line stretches out. yamaki ha hashiriikuni, yamaki re hirihiã re shoarayouwei.

to get out of the water, to set foot on land (from a canoe). hashirio.

this morning I brought the roof poles a little closer. hãto ya nahiki aheamai kuprei.

to bring heavy or bulky objects a little closer to where one wants to carry them. aheamai.

to move on the plain (after having walked in the mountains); to be located below (after having been above). pepiprou.

that is exchanged for beads, a long and well-loaded necklace of beads is needed to be able to get a cotton hammock. tope ke p pehi, pe tope shiko re totihii ha, ihi yii re pe pehi.

to make dense, thick or crowded (locally). shikoã.

to dishevel, to tousle (someone. poruk.

to be agitated on the surface. hirehiremou.

to surround quickly. hãyotou.

fear will make me turn my face away. ya kiriri mi huruprarou kukei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial).

to turn one. hurukei.

Translation:. wawa e hena kuprou shoarayoma, yetu ke e.

más estrecho (hueco, cavidad). wãkikãi.

he approached them, he came near them, and they were afraid of him, and they fled. a ha tikukutoni, a ha hamorioni, the pe horiã ha hititirarini, the pe hoketamama (mit.

to approach, to come near. hamorioni.

ray of sun, sunlight. mothoka shii.

ray of sunlight, sunbeam. shii.

tree; Cecropia metensis (Cecropiaceae). The bark fibers are used to make bow strings and hammock ropes.. shikri.

tomorrow I will cut a pijiguao palm, and on the way I will fabricate a club (with it). henaha rasha ya si tuyei, himo ke ya thapraheripe.

to fabricate (something) on the way. thapraheripe.

seducir a una mujer beneficiándose con la complicidad de un compadre. puhi washuu.

to seduce a woman by taking advantage of a friend. washuu.

we started to go out quickly from the water and then, in a place where they went to eat yagrumo fruits, we found freshly cut branches. rope yamaki ha hashiripraikuni, kepo iki re wanowehei, ihi mohe yoa tute.

as he knew tobacco he immediately recognized what it was. pee nahe tai yaia yaro e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to start to. hashiriprai.

spotted, burned, in several parts. fpatihi.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

1. to grow a little, to begin to grow; 2. to make a little fat; 3. medium, a little big. preãkã.

to dye red, to make something red. hiko.

small brown-haired head. he wai re ashiwei.

small brown-haired head. ashiwei.

to have become fluid or to have been fluidified. hereshirayou.

Refers to the males of certain bird species of the genus Pipra sp.. patautherimi.

if you do love while not being big (= a young boy) you will not kill any big partridge (= you will be a bad hunter if you do love at your age). eri wa wamou tehe hãshimo wa thai mai ke the.

big. hãshimo.

his son-in-law lifted his head again. pe hekamapi e mi nonotou korãyoma.

to lift the head repeatedly (iterative). nonotaai.

to cry out in pain for the dead (and would demand that they be avenged). asi.

I get goods. matohi ya pe toai.

I go to get shawarakurimi fruits. shawarakurimi ya ki toai.

to get, to obtain, to take. toani.

to have been incinerated. rãmomarei.

I shook my feet before lying in the hammock. Wake mamiki yaisi ama huu öke wake heri.

to shake or rub one. mamiki yaisi.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

we. osotros.

you were impregnated (lit. wa shipenarayoma.

to impregnate a woman. shipenam.

to tie a guaral from a tree branch. fãsitha karoramai.

to tie a guaral (fishing line) to a tree branch (to catch catfish at night). karoromakei.

night. mãhu.

He is like a son-in-law to me (lit. kama ke iha ya kahiki siyohamou.

to address someone using the term son-in-law, to be in this kinship relationship with someone. fkahiki siyohamou.

to respond favorably to a request for something. hitam.

1. Walk carelessly, without looking around, often with the gaze turned towards the ground. 2. Bend, twist under the effect of a load. Lean the head to receive the blow of an adversary. teio.

1. Scorpion (unidentified animal). 2. Cricket, mole cricket (referring to the south of the Orinoco River). kirikirimi.

qué pene tan grande era ése. wai ta preonowe.

qué gordo era ese pene. wai ta preonowe.

big, large. preonowe.

specific noise of a fart, expressed by the onomatopoeia ã f u. efumou.

language. praharu.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was moving where the others were passing. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

to disperse, scatter (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoikuni.

he is cured completely. a temi heikiprou.

to be in a certain state; very. heiki.

I will bite you several times. pe si wetirarei.

to bite repeatedly, to bite several times. wetirarei.

he is not angry (he is calm). wã oketiwe ke a kua totihia kure.

not be angry, speak calmly. enfrenwe.

to become thin (due to illness or excessive sexual activity). hayapishiai.

it makes noise while flowing. u shararamou.

to make noise while flowing. shãrãrãmo.

he roasted plantains with their skin. sikosi kuratha ke ki yaama.

1. Object with its skin, bark or feathers: not peeled, not debarked, not deplumated. 2. Place in the forest where the undergrowth has not yet been cleared (when one clears it).. sikosi.

al venir aquí hice un rodeo para evitar a la gente Arimawe. ãrimawe theri ke iha ya e ma re ãyoikiyohe.

no se les ocurra ir a atacar al anciano que vive en Arimawe. ãrimawe theri pata a wai re kui, a wãhã wayoai puhi topraotihehe.

a place name. Arimawe.

he left at dawn. the mi ha haruruni the wãri koã henarayoherima.

at dawn, early morning. henarayoherima.

edge (inner or outer) of the foot. mamiki roroku.

edge. roroku.

I am tired. mããri thotho.

to be tired. mããri.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just passed through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

to whiten, to become clean. aushiai.

to incarnate as a hekura, to behave like a hekura. payemo.

the people of the cunaguaros usually crouch at the foot of the ãtãri bushes. ãtãri ke hipe koro hami yaori pe yererou re hearakiri ye.

to crouch, to squat, to huddle. yererou.

to host someone. yãpou.

the river is at its highest level (or: is full of water). u petiwe.

to be full; to be at the highest level (of a watercourse). petiwe.

to reach an excessively ripe state. poshoropiprou.

to speak using a speech distinct from the local speech. kahiramo.

upriver (speaking of upriver). kai ãsho (habla de río arriba.

upriver. ãsho.

don't believe that it is another, it is Kr. ai the pe mãyo puhitihehe, kr. (personal name) the responsible one. re mãyo wãri.

to believe, to think that, to be convinced that. puhitihehe.

they had divided into two parallel rows. yakekeen.

to divide into two parallel rows. yakekeen.

smell of vegetation, smell of jungle. uriripi.

—Cuñado, ¿de verdad eres tú. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe.

yes. —wa.

they left me on the banks of the river. yare kãi re kupariyowehei.

they left me. kupariyowehei.

to start gathering, accumulating, or causing a slight inflammation. shimokoreprai.

oh father of mine, appear. hapemi a ta petaru.

I shot an arrow at him as soon as he appeared. a petou tehe ya the niya shoakema.

Siroromi appeared when the great fire was burning. wake pata wauwaumou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

to appear, to become visible, to manifest, to make noise. petaru.

construct a large one. the ta praukuku.

the house of the men was large. yãnomãmi the pe hãtopi nahi praukuoma.

to extend, enlarge, widen. praukuku.

to make something become dusty (perfective causative form). hekrãpimararei.

null. krukukumi.

go look for arrow canes at the edge of the cane thickets. shereka siki he wetikia re totihire ha a shereka ta ukahe she.

1. To border, limit (a surface) 2. To kill (said during a ceremonial dialogue). wetiki.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. totihirayouwei.

we have the intention of going towards you dancing (in the indicated way). yamaki niya tirurou re heaimi ye (cha.

to have walked backwards, danced making several steps backwards and others forwards. tirururayou.

go to lie down over there. a ta periikutu.

go to lie down over there. periikutu.

to sleep, to live in a hammock hung close to the ground. yahatotoo.

1. Take a large amount of food. 2. Defend oneself efficiently, resist with courage. wãrohoãi.

they proliferated (we realized afterwards). pe the pe pararayou no kureshi.

I had left the arrow at home and the women broke it in my absence. shereka ya ha tapaherini suwe peni a keprai herayou no kuraheshi.

to do something without realizing it. RVpereshi.

to keep closed. kahupou.

to have a worried look, to be worried. puhi no sherekanaripi puhipe ushuhuwe.

to have a worried look, to be worried. ndido.

in what refers to water, we will not lack. pemaki rii yapekeope, mãu ke upe ha.

we will not lack (in reference to water). yapekeope.

they renounced wanting to kill them. mãrãshi ya pe nape hashirionomi.

to renounce wanting to kill someone. hashirionomi.

black caracara (bird species). Daptrius ater.

a mythological being. babithoka.

the earth is crumbling. mashitha a hishiai.

it was no use putting stones (to plug the holes), the water undermined the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama (mit.

to collapse, to crumble (terminative aspect). hishiprou.

to address someone using that term, to be with a female person in a husband-wife relationship. wãhãmamou.

my husband. wãhãmaye.

it was very hot. totatotaprariyo.

Leptodactylus bolivianus (a type of frog). hoãhoãmi.

package tied in that way. yãthorima.

headache. yayu.

to smooth several objects. tãihirarei.

to improve, to fix, to repair; to order, to classify (perfective, plural object). totihitaakei.

I have the sensation of biting a bait several times in a row (like catfish do when they bite the bait). yahatoto hami seguidas (como lo hacen los bagres cuando rasha pe no ikrekerayopi.

to pull slightly several times from its trunk. ikrekerayou.

here there are not many, hanging tightly together (hanging pots). hei ke e pe pata ma re hãrokowe.

to hang tightly together. fãroko.

The Yanomami people were situated over there. ãyãkorãni ke pe ma ithera tehe irani yãnomãmi.

locative, to be situated at a distance. ra.

sister, come closer. amiye, wa ha aheteikiyoni.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

to approach, to get close. etei.

in vain they struck the rock of Mount Sipara with their tools, their tools did not penetrate. sipara ke ki hore pahehãmahe (mit.

to slide without penetrating (the blade of a tool in poor condition). pãhehou.

I only managed to graze the tapirs (with the arrows I shot at them). ware ya pe shiro si tikekerarema.

to graze, scratch. tikekeo.

allomorph of prapariyo in the presence of derived forms, modals or others, characterized by the same phonological conditioning. prapariyo.

confront each other only with sticks, do not tie knives to the tips. pe ta wapayo, hii ke hi shironi, sipara wama si hiihãi mai.

to confront, to face off, to fight. wapa.

soon it became night and they cut firewood. the he titia shorarayoma, koã ãsho poai re shoarariyouwehei.

they cut firewood. shoarariyouwehei.

Woman-woodpecker arrived at her house. Mujer-picumonãmãriwe kama yahipi cho.

Woman-woodpecker. Mujer-picumonãmãriwe.

Woman-curare crumbled a piece of her skin and let it fall into the throat of Jaguar's son. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema.

I shell corn. yono ya mope hushishai.

to crumble, pulverize with the fingers, crumble in the hand. ushishai.

I will not demand any bamboo arrowhead from you while they are mourning their dead (lit. pe puhiki yikitio tehe, eha ipa rahaka a ta hiipa, ya kuu mai ke the.

to be very afflicted by the death of a relative; to cry for a deceased relative. yikiti.

to be continuously roasting plantains over the embers. yatayatamai.

I'm going to wash myself properly with soap (lit. moshimoshi peni ya ta yãrimou ta pashio sho.

to wash oneself. moshimoshi.

to diminish, to become smaller, to narrow. sipiai.

he laughed mockingly again. a nokã ikãi kooma.

to laugh, laughter. nokã.

I will not separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I will go downstream to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

to go live apart, to separate from others to live elsewhere. kasipariyo.

spotted or speckled with black (generally a dog). pãrishãpi.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

1. small. 2. To scratch or uncover the ground with the foot to . hãrãrukei.

the sun was setting when he returned home. mothoka kaiprou tehe a koã kopema.

the sunlight no longer reaches except the tops of the trees. mothoka shi shererou.

the sun is low (sunset). mothoka yahatotowe.

the sun begins to decline slightly (around 1pm). mothoka yotehewe.

sun. mothoka.

border. yaipe.

we have come and we have removed the evil (from the body of the sick person, the hekura say). pei, pei ye, yamaki re hayumayoruhe.

we have removed the evil. hayumayoruhe.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just gone through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

to constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole). uriyo.

the mount Morãmãnã that rises near here, who lives (lit. hei morãmãnã ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi kothe ha weti ke a wãri roa.

mountain. morãmãnã.

when Kreakrea was alone he pushed aside with his hand the leaves that isolated the girl (on the occasion of her first menstruation). kreakreani yipi henaki hãiprai re hearayonowei.

to push aside with the hand something that obstructs the path. hearayonowei.

he ran crying and arrived at his house. miã kãi rerea ha yairiherini, kama pe yahipi hami a koprariyoma.

arrived. yehiherini.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogenic substance, I imagine very distant things (lit. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

to be under the effect of a hallucinogenic substance, to lose sense of reality, to have abnormal behavior. wãrioprou.

aunque allá el enemigo sea aterrorizante, yo me propongo atacarlo (lit. kihi kitanari a pata re fuopiyei, a no ma kiriai tehe, a nape niya rii keo totihiawe.

puma. totihiawe.

to extend, to spread out (in surface area). hauhuprou.

he slid under her thighs. pei waku hami e ha horeapraroni.

to slide under the thighs. horeapraroni.

an apparition chased after me. poreni ke ware nosi hore ma re pou totihioimaprei.

apparition, ghost. poreni.

to be strong for moments, to be alternately strong and weak (noise). nakretou.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to turn over, invert, exchange. hemihikei.

I and my brother-in-law are going to gather fruits low (near the ground). mayepi yagra.

low, near the ground. mayepi.

he began to peel the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to begin to remove the outer layer. roshipraruni.

Õmawe perforated the ground with the tip of his bow. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama.

to pierce, to perforate. nahini.

to make war. yãri nathasi.

to cut down a tree. manakoro.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to heal, to get better, to recover (health state). manahehe.

they appeared; one and the other were big. the kipi wawet theiai.

to slide and fall on one. roprao.

the survivors fled far away. prahai hami the pe wai shee tokurayoherima.

to keep leftovers. sheepou.

we will hold each other's arms and shoulders. pehe the pe wãri ha ipiararini peheki hãkimope.

to hold each other. ipiararini.

to be. maanu.

to receive a portion cut by tearing or separating a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hahathopei.

to execute a task quickly. haiproimi.

to be lodged deeply inside. he wasihou.

be lodged deeply inside. wasihi.

to have climbed the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikikei.

it turns out that, while they were walking, they stuck the big stone perpendicularly (into the ground). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe (mit.

to plant, fix, stick in, prick; to fix an object perpendicularly to another; to hook a fishing line to the bottom. shatiamai.

to become red/reddish (due to sun exposure). wake*.

to cover with first vegetation. he yaho.

to cut with the wã hira (a type of knife). wahetiai.

I'm going to look for river crabs. oko ya pe wai ta hupaheri sho.

to search for, to look for. hupaheri.

Centipede carved Jaguar's feet and gave them shape. kumãrãwe ke ki wãrini, irariwe ke mamiki yakekerarema (mit.

1. Scrape the bottom of a container (generally with a gourd). 2. Brush, carve (to shape an object), strike short blows with the edge of a tool, produce shavings. hatate.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ya ishorayoma.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

the mosquitoes bite (lit. ukushi pe ishou.

to attack, to aggress; to kill. ishou.

he made pieces of vine jump by cutting them with his nails. pei ke imisikini e thoku hematha yutuataramai kupariyoma.

nails, claws; flight feathers. imisikini.

father-in-law, father-in-law, here is the honey (of the mashipuma species). shoape, shoapemi, hei mashipuma ke a kua kure.

your father-in-law. shoahe.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying and swinging the torso and arms a lot. rahumou.

make the child sit. ihiru a ta romaki.

I perched the parrot. shukumi ya romakema.

to make sit (a child), to perch (a domestic animal); to wait for a bird to perch (in order to shoot it with an arrow). romaki.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying the torso and arms. rahumo.

went around, went to call the shaman. herani, ira a horomirema.

went around, made a detour. herani.

I put the plantains to cook under the ashes. siponapoai.

I put the plantains to cook under the ashes. siponapoai.

to readily engage in violence. puhipe tharehe.

to be brave, to readily engage in violence. puhi no sherekanaripi.

domestic. domésticas.

to be sick, to be possessed by kamakari. forãmi kamakaripi.

to be possessed by the spirit of a dead person; to be sick from ingesting the ashes of a dead person. kamakaripi.

he returned empty-handed. shiroko a kopema.

he will simply keep the flashlight without batteries by his side in the hammock. rintena the pata shiroko yakapou poope.

to take something without giving anything in return; to be empty (flashlight without batteries); to return empty-handed (from hunting or fishing). rurayorupe.

to pile up (fruits). pororou.

to force an object into a too narrow opening (and get it stuck). hokoãmai.

He put himself down on the ground for a moment. Rasitou ama pei.

to put oneself down on the ground for a moment. rasitou.

we slowly stretched our necks to see. opisi ke yamaki oraki yarehou.

1. to raise the head, stretch the neck to see over something, raise the chin when walking in deep waters; 2. to extend the arm to grab something. yarehe.

to be able to be covered, state. kahuamou.

to steal the same object several times. thomitaai.

to rise up in great numbers. yorukuai.

the yawari made her walk in front of them and thus they reached a savanna. yawari peni a pararupouhe tehe, pirisi a hami a kãi hoã waroa mahikemahe.

to make someone walk in front of one; to guide someone by the hand (a blind person, an elderly person, a child). pararupouhe.

Macagua was the first to paint himself, tracing circles on his skin with a ball of coloring (myth). prereimariwe ke a hore hikikiwe ha pariraruni, a wãri ha raokoraruni.

to be entirely painted with round spots; to be completely speckled or mottled. hikikiwe.

The bees are swarming. tori ke pe.

to swarm. rãtãrãtãmou.

to move limping or hobbling. kayeheaprarou.

the noise of the raw (meat) they were chewing could be heard. riye ke the pe ha the pe shãkãushãkãumoma (mit.

noise produced when chewing food. shãkãushãkãumou.

to bend, to twist. kohehãi.

beyond the place where the Waika live, the tapirs rub against the trees all day long (lit. waika pe hiraope hami, the he tore hami, shamari ke a pata mãrikãi he re weyaraturei.

to be during the whole day in a given situation. weyaraturei.

to make someone/something go down abruptly from a hammock. wahehepramai.

he kept the tobacco pouch on the stone axe handle. poo ke hetho ha pee nahe makepoma.

he carried a large stone on his shoulder. maa ke ma pata makepoherima.

to place an object on top of another; to carry an object on top of another; to carry on the shoulder. makerei.

to become rough, gritty, granular. erereãi.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. wa wake ha paramapani.

to light a fire in the central plaza. paramapei.

rituals. rituales.

in all places the smallpox decimated the Yanomami people. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

to disappear, to be decimated. mrao.

passed in front of him and turned her back on him. a hayuparuni, a humapi reprou tehe nãroriwe.

passed in front of him. hayuparuni.

the carrying strap stretches downward. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downward (durative aspect). prayukou.

set of matches contained in a box. pohoro hiki.

match, matchstick. pohoro.

show him immediately how to do it. a ta wea shoaki.

immediately, right away. shoaki.

to kill. fwãrihotho thap r a i.

to help someone urinate, to accompany a child, a sick person or an elderly person to urinate. keyemarei.

when the disease demons descend from the sky, a red light ignites from the chest of omãyãrithawe. omãyãrithawe ke pariki wake homoprou mi ha paoni, kama re pe ithoprou re tehe.

to ignite, to light up. ithoprou.

they disappeared stealthily, their house emptied suddenly. pe re mraa hãthokeheriiwei, pe yahipi prokotariyoma.

to empty quickly, to become empty. prokou.

plant, boroboro; Montrichardia arborescens (Araceae). It grows on the water. arborescens.

brother, don't be angry. ã iwe, a hushuotihe.

don. hushuotihe.

¿qué dices. weti ke wa wã. Preguntaron las cotorras cabeciazules. ãrima peni a ha wãriheni.

voices, sounds. wãriheni.

the ketipa leaves tear easily. ketipa hena si sheaai si ihehewe.

to tear, to break (in one place). sheaai.

they were left adrift on the flood current. motu ke uni the pe kareprou ha kurarei (mit.

to float, to drift. karerayou.

¿no ves que hay dos calabazas cinerarias. hei hishima ke kipi porakaa ma re totihire.

algunos mostraron sus puntas de flechas de bambú. porakapi peni rahaka ke ki mimahe.

two, dual. porakaa.

to remain in that way for a moment. waririprao.

brother-in-law, come down from your mountain (to visit us). shoriwe a mi ta wereparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

come down. baja.

I'm going to make love. ya shi kreo.

to make love (humorous). kreo.

pleasant smell of certain ripe fruits, smell of a half-roasted banana. riyeri.

to begin to break, crush, smash. karesheprai.

(related suffix). -ti-.

to have mixed (two powders). tikururayou.

show him immediately how to do it, if not he will get into difficulties: "this is how you have to do it", tell him that immediately. a ta wea shoaki, a puhi wetinahamou tao: "e naha wa the thatape", wa e kuu ha shoaoni.

tell/inform immediately. shoaoni.

that the ones who put feathers of birds of prey in the lobes of their ears come. pe no koikoimipi hena huuhou ta kuikiyo.

ones who put feathers of birds of prey in the lobes of their ears. koikoimipi.

his wife was underneath, at the foot of the rock. pei maki kothe ha pe suwepi ke a pehitheakirioma.

to place an object underneath, to place at the foot (of a tree, elevation). pehithekei.

to have gotten wet. hererariyo.

to leave a part of something for someone; to leave a rest, not to eat everything, not to give everything. taiw.

the curiara is in the middle of the water. k anawa mi ãmo hami a kãtãyoa.

in the middle of the water. kãtãyoa.

to diminish (in quantity). porakapiai.

you will fight with sticks. wamaki sheyou kupei.

to hit each other. sheyou.

their corpses were scattered on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

they discovered the black-painted sorcerers scattered (dead) on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe (mit.

to scatter, disseminate, spread on the ground. tikukukei.

to coincide more, to become false. yokahaprou.

the Waika ciempiés venenosos hacían sufrir a los Waika durante todo el día (lit. peni waika pe nini waiamai he re weyarati.

to make something smell good, to perfume. kretriprou.

it is inside. hushomi hami the kua.

in the interior, in the bottom. fhushomi.

to pass through the same place. hatahata.

to hesitate, not know what to do. weti nahamo.

to be slightly curved (wall of an object). wãhetea.

to be momentarily in the last position (while walking in a group through the forest). shiokaprao.

to loosen, slacken, stretch out (inchoative). prihããi.

to loosen, slacken, stretch out. ihã.

to start scratching with nails, generally to remove red spots caused by gnat bites. tisikipramou.

acaso no hirieron a mi yerno (lit. nahi ma re wãriãprahihahei.

son-in-law. hekama.

driguera haciendo girar rápidamente entre las. yori haciendo girar rápidamente entre las.

driguera. yori.

vertebra. humotho.

to be locally cracked or cracked open. thepaha.

to soften several objects. epehamai.

to soften. epeh.

the shamans will take possession of your footprints. okrã peni wa mãyo re yurareiwehei.

"people from upriver came to attack us with deadly substances", they declared. "ora theri ke pe okã huma", pe nowã thahe.

shaman or sorcerer. okrã.

to cause breathlessness, to cause fatigue. wãshimimai.

they are the ones who will do it. kama peni the thapehe.

they will do it. thapehe.

he palpated it several times and then said: "it's an old man". a ha huperarini: "pata ke the", e kuma.

to touch different places, to feel around, to palpate. huperarei.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. ukahe.

the raw ones were placed on top, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached to the bottom (of the package). heaka ka ha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to the bottom. kohomoo.

Murciélago fue a pegarse (a lo largo de un tronco de árbol). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

to stick, attach, adhere (a single object). sutikei.

extensive region. aka praukuwe.

the house of the men was wide. yãnomãmi the pe hãtopi nahi praukuoma.

vast, extensive, wide. praukuwe.

mother-in-law, I am thirsty. yape, ya amishi: suegra, tengo sed.

(in a myth): he carried in his arms a small, wrinkled, hungry cachicamo. opo si ãikiwe ke a wai amishiri yakarema (mit.

thirst. amishi.

great bat; Wampyrum spectrum. wãZool.

Baba mantenía el fuego dentro de su boca (para esconderlo). iwariweni a wake hopoma.

el chamán escupió la planta (de la cual nació) un jaguar. hekurani ira hena hoprarema.

to vomit. weipou.

they live in two dwellings situated next to each other. peria poakawe.

live in two dwellings situated next to each other. poakawe.

1. To put to dry by the heat of the fire, to smoke. 2. To tell someone to dry, to start smoking.. tetekeamai.

tomorrow I will work in the fields (downstream). henaha ya hikarimokiriope.

I will work in the fields (downstream). hikarimokiriope.

to send to attack. shurukamai.

I am no longer a little child (humorous antithesis, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

little bird that is starting to grow feathers. makamakapi.

to twist. toyekai.

it is said of the smoke that rises inside a dwelling. poyukai.

To make the water foamy in which one is soaking clothes. Moshiprai hacer que se ponga espumosa el agua en la que uno está remojando ropa.

to make water foamy when soaking clothes. moshiprai.

I'm going to wash myself properly with soap (lit. moshimoshi peni ya ta yãrimou ta pashio sho.

to wash oneself. moshimoshi.

calabash tree; Crescentia amazonica (Bignoniaceae). totumo.

to place vertically, to put vertical. yororoãmai.

to loosen quickly or regularly. prorotou.

although it is very far away, bring me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa.

distant, far away. yaferii.

we did not take any women, all were ugly. suwe yama pe toanomi, pe wãritiwe haikiwe ha.

they had gathered all the poles (that they needed for building the collective house) in the central plaza. the pe hãto nahi hiraa haikipemahe.

all, everything, completely. haikiwe.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekai.

I throw salt into the cooking water. sayu ya keamai.

to throw, to drop into water. keamai.

Tapara or totuma (container) made from the fruit of the espeshokãtãma plant. Tapara o totuma hecha con el fruto de la planta espeshokãtãma.

Woman, during the waya-shokomomou or a serious conversation (they are the ones who go to fetch water with these taparas). Mujer, durante el waya-shokomomou o una conversación seria (son ellas quienes van a buscar agua con estas taparas).

sorocuá (a type of bird). espeshokãtãma.

my breath stopped coming out of my mouth and came out of my side. pei ya kahiki hami ya mishiãki kuprou mai, roroku hami re ya mishiãki pata preshesheprou ha shoaroni.

to be or put oneself on the side. rorokuo.

to paint or dye something a light red color. momihãi.

I provoked the return of the hekura. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

to provoke the return, to oblige to retrace one. tatomai.

a little forceful, vigorous, noisy. eshi.

he stopped when he was very close (to him). prake ha a re upraopariyowei.

he stopped when he was very close (to him). upraopariyowei.

it has really the intention of making it end, it has really the intention of making it die. a mi niya wathemai ha totihioni, a niya waikamai ha totiohioni (mit.

to have the real intention of making something/someone end, to have the real intention of killing something/someone. totiohioni.

the beads of the necklace that he had broken scattered. tope ke pe huhetima no yapikamama.

necklace of beads that has been intentionally broken. huhetima.

rumai: 1. rumai: 1. To put to flight. Poner en fuga. 2. 2. To put out of reach, to protect goods from envy of others (often by hiding them in the forest). Poner fuera de alcance, proteger bienes de la envidia de los demás (a menudo escondiéndolos en la selva).

to put to flight, to put out of reach, to protect goods from envy of others (often by hiding them in the forest). rumai.

hard, rigid, stiff. yii.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to that by which they had arrived (so as not to attract with the noise a beast that was pursuing them). the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

to exceed (in quantity, in length), to go beyond (a limit), to leave behind. toreai.

todos ellos treparon, todos ascendieron penosamente. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

ascended penosamente (with difficulty). hãmorimoherima.

dispersed to do a search or hunt. rãkokokei.

we heard the enemy warriors when they were crying over the dying person and trying to save him. wayu re pe ã wãri ma teteo tehe, pe wãri ma peyeprayohorayou tehe, yama pe wã hirima.

to try to save. peyeprayohorayou.

to be a little long, a little loose. fpreyukuhu.

to make a circular motion in the water; to clean a container with water by making a circular motion with the hand, to wash a cloth by making that motion; to stir the water in a circle with the foot to make the fruits that are at the bottom rise to the surface. yaprokoai.

in the place where the body of my dead relative is exposed, an unknown and terrifying voice was heard. wato re nahi, yai the kipi ã no re kimuy ripiyei e.

dead woman. kimuy.

my basket. shoteye.

I don't have any more arrows (lit. s h erekaye ke ki mrarayou kuhe.

my basket. shoteye.

his spouse was transformed into stone, with his arrows placed against him. pe heãropi pei ke ma kuprou waikirayouwei ha, shereka ke ki ha waririmareni.

to store long objects next to each other, or to place them in that way. wariripou.

he wants to wait for the morã fruits to ripen before picking them. morã mape niya ushiamai.

to wait for a fruit to ripen before harvesting it. Ñame.

your wives deny you tobacco and keep you in need of it. suwepihe pe shi ha imaoni pee ke wama nahe pe ha horipoheni.

to deny something to someone, to keep someone in need of something. imaoni.

you are hairy. wa koi.

to get under, to go down, to sink. koi.

throw away the empty chinchorros (of the hekura that have left), inhale hallucinogens, let the shamans trace a new path (for the hekura) and you will become heavy again (= the hekura will return to lodge in your body). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei (cha.

to become heavy; to regain the hekura spirits and thereby gain weight and power (for a shaman). hutea.

to be wrinkled or crumpled. wãihihi.

The path is starting to get muddy. yoka ãhiãi : el camino comienza a estar embarrado.

to get muddy. ãhiãi.

the arrow has split into pieces. thoku kakiprariyoma.

it has split into pieces. kakiprariyoma.

to be curved, sinuous. hipoyewe.

the blood transformed into demons of dusk. yeiye pe patani weyari pe kuprou shoarayoma.

people of demons. weyari.

I'm going to establish my garden upriver. ora ha ke ya rii hikarimorãyou.

to be working in the garden. hikari-mo-u.

to have developed white spots on the body (probably due to a fungal infection). yoapirayou.

to be near. peishoki.

they are always crying in the forest (after a mourning period). pe hoyããimi.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

they do not utter death threats (against you). the pe ã hoyããi maa kure.

This word is part of various idiomatic expressions. hoyããi.

large white larva (unidentified (animal, plant)), parasite of banana and cambur plants. nakoya.

speech of upriver people. hawaro.

if they come to visit us, I will hide the pot in the forest. pe hamamou ha urihi hami hapoka ya si hithekei.

I will hide. hithekei.

several objects. aushiprawe.

mantener fija. mamoku royokãi.

to keep fixed. royokãi.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to cause to submerge. paotamai.

we will smoke the birds, little brother. kirithami pema pe makeprape, oãsi.

to smoke (birds, meat, etc.). makeprape.

to start improving, repairing, arranging, classifying. totihitaprai.

moku pesi pou ta shoaima: bring the cartridge case too. moku pesi pou ta shoaima: trae también la cartuchera.

cartridge case. cartuchera.

to bathe. mãrã sinahi.

to bathe. sinahi.

to be hungry. taamaki.

peeled the cambur fruit and opened it in two to see if it contained seeds. wake e ha roshiprarini, pei re moku kua ha mini, e ka eririprarema.

peeled (it). roshiprarini.

the small bamboo point is really very sharp. rahaka ke a wai hitotowe totihiwe.

to be very sharp (a bamboo arrowhead). hitotowe.

I glanced. ya mipraai.

to do something for a very short time. praama.

headdress of the hekura covered with white down. watoshe horoi.

tree (unidentified) on which the yakureto caterpillars feed. yakureto nahi.

generic term applied to various species of edible caterpillars. yakureto.

Its succulent roots are edible. Pl.

cultivated plant, lairén; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). allouia.

to become lukewarm. pothothoprai.

temporarily vacant dwelling or camp. mathokoprou.

work in your turn. a ohotamo mi ta hetuiku.

wake up in your turn. a ta rãã mi hetuiku.

in turn, in one. hetuiku.

worked in the conucos (gardens). fhikarimomarei.

his older brother, who is there, if only we could live in adjacent homes. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

female relative older than Ego (masc. or fem.) with whom Ego has a consanguineous relationship: older sister, mother, mother. tikretao.

to lift a hammock. ãrãnãmou.

to walk on tiptoe. hitesheaprarou.

they made us flee. yamareki yashurema.

to make flee, to put to flight, to expel from a place, to dislodge; to reject the enemy. yashurema.

my shoulder aches more and more. ya hako hayeheri parai.

to have muscle aches, to suffer from muscle pains. hayeheri.

in the places where the waterfalls are high, the multicolored tilingos have beautiful plumage. pora tirewe ke pe hami, hurepari pe horoi totihitawe.

high. tirewe.

to periodically lack food (from fields). ohetou.

they have just gathered near here, on the hilltop. hesika ha ke pe hiraa ahetepeyoruu kuhe.

they have just gathered. ahetepeyoruu.

when the day arrived, when the dawn began to rise, he woke him up. mi ka wãhepe ha ya the re pomiã shoakeiwei.

to begin to rise (of the dawn). wãhepe.

to be stingy. shi ima.

the tip or point of a tool. koherãyou.

I saw in a dream the emerald hummingbird peaks, throwing the magic plants (heri) out of their beaks. aroaromi koshi pe ãhã re kure ihi the pe pehi mahari yutuhoma.

to stumble repeatedly; to be thrown repeatedly; to advance by successive leaps. yutuhoma.

I did it slowly, without being afraid. kirii mai ya hutaariyoherima.

he/she/it did it slowly, without being afraid. hutaariyoherima.

listen to me attentively. yimika hirãrãparu.

listened attentively. yimika hirãrããi.

to listen attentively. hirãrão.

fish, bocón. poko.

the canoe is in the usual place. copulankãã.

the canoe is in the usual place. copulankãã.

the tree stump is short. hii nanoka manakoroa.

stump, tree stump. nanoka.

esta cola habrá de cocinarse, habrá que quemar los pelos. shina the wãri tuope, pei pe mi hamope.

To desplumar (pluck feathers), depilar (remove hair), quemar el pelaje (burn fur/hair). fra.

to imitate, parody, mimic someone; to measure (the length of something), evaluate (a quantity), count. we-.

he really metamorphosed, and became a trogon tail white. a shi rii wãrihiprou katitia shoarayoma, kurekuremi a kuprariyoma.

trogon tail white. kurekuremi.

it's about wanting to go hunting when it's pouring rain. maa ke pe ma pririrou tehe a rãmi huu ta totihio thare.

downpour. cántaros.

the woman kept sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. suwe ke a mi hore wãheãpraroma, yii ke ki ha a he yohoapraroma.

to have a sunken belly due to a sterilizing substance called manaka (for a woman). wãheteãi.

that man from the Horetoi community, whose skin is covered in white patches, intends to attack me with magic. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

a community name. horetoi.

soft, tender, flexible. ãhusi.

to be surrounded. tipepei.

a heavy load that exerts strong traction on a carrying strap (pulling it down). fhute ihohoo.

1. A heavy load that exerts strong traction on a carrying strap (pulling it down). 2. To hang upside down, like a sloth or a spider from its web.. ihohoo.

to have perforated/pierced multiple times. hiroshorarei.

he shot Titiri in the stomach with a blowgun dart. titiri a horaprarema, amoku ha pe the totihia re shoakeiwei (mit.

stomach. ãmoki.

to paint, to draw a transverse line. oni*.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, to break or grab (perfective, plural object). yãmonirarei.

to become a shaman, to have been initiated as a shaman. herii.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

to scratch, to uncover the ground with the foot to . fãrãru.

they went to kill fish and araka upstream. ora hami yaraka re pe shei mi huprou kupemahe.

to kill fish. kupemahe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. fniya hupamou maorewe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. maorewe.

don't look at me eating this, don't let them see me eat so they don't get sick. ai he, ware maikaprarihe: no me miren comer, no ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

let. makekea.

low, near the ground. yahatoto yape.

low, near the ground. yapani.

remain aligned for a moment. rãyoprao.

tobacco. shama.

to be slightly inclined. fkaihihi.

to break, to remove. hahathoai.

following Woman-palm the songs are directed here. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

Woman-palm. okosiyoma.

to have a sunken belly, to become extremely thin (due to illness or a magic substance). heheteai.

tree. Duguetia.

to finally speak calmly. okerayou.

to have a bulging torso, to have a prominent chest (offensive). pariki yeprihia.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

to stagger, to totter. totihiohe.

it took us a long time to climb the last part of the trail and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain. hesikaai.

mythological ancestor of the Yanomami. oAntepasado.

Its succulent roots are edible. Sus suculentas raíces son comestibles.

cultivated plant; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). lairén.

when (he) cut the liana the tree slackened suddenly. thoo thotho peprai tehe a pehi kãi yokerayoherima.

to slacken or loosen suddenly. yokerayoherima.

my hair is falling out. ya hesi prerei.

my hair is falling out. prererayou.

to move the raised hand from right to left with the fingers spread, to indicate to someone that what they are looking for has not been found. fimiki yãweyãwemou.

to move the raised hand from right to left with the fingers spread, to indicate to someone that what they are looking for has not been found. yãweyãwe.

I will give you everything (willingly). ya pe hipeai hititiope.

I will give (willingly). hititiope.

when Yoawe saw the woman he turned into a rock gallito to capture her. yoaweni suwe a taprai tehe, a niya ha huweani, a hore ehoãmi unaprou shoaoma.

to capture, seize, grab (a single object). yoaweni.

they shot numerous arrows at a large fat peccary, near a lake. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, wawewawe praope ha.

they shot numerous bamboo-tipped arrows. shekiaremahe.

Centipede carved Jaguar's feet and gave them shape. kumãrãwe ke ki wãrini, irariwe ke mamiki yakekerarema.

to chip, to whittle, to carve by striking with a sharp tool. yakekekei.

1. to sway violently, to slide abruptly (long object); to stumble. 2. to let oneself fall backwards into the water. wekeprakei.

bejuco (vine); Drymonia serrulata (Gesneriaceae). shãkurãmi thotho.

you have not answered their request. wamaki wã huo mãopere.

you have not answered their request. mãopere.

I followed closely. ya nahi ikoikomama.

following closely. ikoikomama.

Bot. Bot. , fern; Dicranopteris pectinata (Pteridophyta). , helecho; Dicranopteris pectinata (Pteridophyta).

fern. moromoro.

she passed the tobacco through the ashes carelessly, kneaded the quid and threw it at him. pee nahe yetu re the ha shãishãikini, the ha humiprarini, e the sheyekema.

she passed the tobacco through the ashes carelessly. shãishãikini.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the screaming piha (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

screaming piha (bird). hãihãiyomi.

to come off as a result of a blow (a fragment). yayetiprou.

he walked along the ridge of the mountain where Aparecido was camping. perio totihiope hami the re matotaheriiwei.

he walked along the ridge of the mountain where he was camping. matotaheriiwei.

to be wide in all its dimensions. thepahawe.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood erect, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

standing close together. shirikou.

to refuse to accept a gift, an object, a portion of food. waii.

to refuse, reject, decline. waii.

to support a canoe under construction by placing logs on its edges. paihiprai.

to be all present in a vikuaprani, weti ipa a totoa ta fenapa (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue. a wã rii fa tado t h a i k i a.

to kill someone (and thus cause the parents to cry). wã tetemapei, perf.

to be present. wã.

not speak. komio.

brother-in-law, don't make me unhappy, break off a little of your yopo snuff for me. shoriwe, yare no preaamatihe, the wai tiiprai mi hetua ta shoaroni.

to start breaking off, to start taking a portion of something. tiiprai.

I always respond to the demands of brave men. yãnomãmi kurahewe the pe riha ya the pe ã huamai si ihehewe.

brave. kurehewe.

he sent Arrendajo (to harvest fruits). ãyãkorãriwe a shimirema (mit.

to send someone to do something; to send something to someone. shimirema.

noise of a metallic object when struck by a hard object. tããmou.

none of us found anything. yamaki no pruka pahateanomi.

to not obtain any result during a search, to work uselessly, to waste time. no ohe.

I am hungry. atapa nahi.

to be hungry. atapa.

to have made several scratches. iprushirariyoma.

the woman could liberate herself from me. huko siki yacapar.

to liberate oneself, to free oneself. yacapar.

to sin. herosiwe.

the spirit takes possession of (someone's) mouth. kahiki teai.

to take possession of. teai.

I finished polishing the bow. hãto ya nahi hoprarema.

I split the papaya in two. shamakoro ya hakaroprarema.

He took the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

to finish, to complete. hoprarema.

al llegar desparramaron por el suelo los paquetes de guabinas. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

they scattered on the ground. yapikohoroperei.

to look with the corner of the eye. ashetou.

the door gets stuck. yoka hão.

a fish bone will get stuck in your throat. wa niosi hããrei.

to get stuck, to get caught, to get intercepted during a fall. hããr.

the great guatura has a muddy appearance. wii ke a pata mimou koshi.

to seem brave. fmimou puhi tikrohowe.

to seem, to appear. fmimou.

I have the habit of entering through tree hollows and eating honey. k amiye pei ke ya ha rukeoproherini, ya upe waaprai tharei.

when the cassava is good to harvest, come down from the mountain (to eat them with us). nashi siki eteoprou tehe eyemi a mi ta wereparu.

indicates repetition of an action by one or more subjects at different times; can also denote a frequentative. -apra-.

to clean one. wamoretou.

to be dizzy. hipihipi.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to splash each other, to play splashing mutually. hamishayou.

to place a limit on a surface, to limit. tiroroai.

be attentive while walking. a ta moyaweaheri.

to become prudent, attentive. moyaweprou.

to be a bad shooter with a bow, to be a bad hunter. tehe.

to be a bad shooter, to be a bad hunter. tehe.

to squeal (referring to). keekeemou.

as he felt no resistance, he inserted his penis between the pubic hairs (of the woman). the prore ha koikoi pe ha the moroshi epehetou re shoarayouwei.

pubic hair. koikoi.

they put the peppers to dry quickly, roughly, over the fire. praki re a weheroweheroa re shoarareiwehei.

to smoke/cure incompletely (e.g. meat or fish). weheroweheroa.

mix. konimai.

to be iridescent, shimmering (continuous state). tererou.

I am thirsty, I will drink. ya amishi, mãu ya u ta wakaroa sho.

to drink. wakaroa.

we fished upstream from where the Karesisiwe river flows into (the main river). karesisiwe u re papohori ha pemaki yuri kããma.

to flow into, to discharge into (a river). papohori.

are you able to see the movement of the coughing demon. thokoriwe wama a huu taprai.

supernatural being associated with coughing. thokoriwe.

I put my foot in the middle of a snake lying on the ground. oru ke ki praope ha ya ki poushoku re katikireiwei.

tie a bark strap around my mother's waist and take her by the arm (to guide her). naye wama poushoku ha okãkini a wãri ta ipipahe.

middle, waist, kidneys. fpoushoku.

listen well. a yimika ta utuparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to prick up one. yimika utu.

in several places the racimo de pijiguaos are high on the palms. rasha pe isiprawe.

there are this number of children (the speaker shows the amount with their fingers), they are tall boys. e naha ihiru ke pe kuwe, mãrãnãpi isiwe.

high, elevated. isiprawe.

we went to look for leaves, each one of us on their side. yama hena pe ha thaapotuni haye ya e hena ki omarema.

go hunt paujies (each one on their side). paruri ke a ta niyaapotuhe.

each one by their side. -apotayo.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to produce spasmodically (referring to bubbles rising to the surface of water). poririporirimou.

to dry by heat or smoke (terminative form). tetekeprou.

to have launched a magical or malefic substance. hororei.

we intend to meet with our dear brother-in-law. ãsimawe ri ha yamaki niya waroo re totihirayoi e (cha.

brother-in-law (son of father. ãsimawe.

I perched the parrot. shukumi ya romakema.

parrot. shukumi.

he wants to get guns to kill me. homomami ke ki ha nakani, ihi ke kini ware niya re prapope.

gun. homomami.

if Horonãmi had not been there, we would still be in misery and hunger. horonãmi a yai kuo mãoma ohiri pemaki no peprarou piyekou shoaa.

place, location. mãoma.

to sleep in a hammock hung above another. makeprao.

they circled around the rocky wall of the mountain at its base. pei maki kothe hami the pe ã y o r i m a.

to put below, to bring down. kothekei.

to pile up tobacco leaves one on top of the other and make balls to keep them dry. ithorikei.

to adhere something to someone. raoyou.

shaman who manages to cure his patients. fimiki nihite.

shaman who manages to cure his patients. naka.

barely perceptible discontinuous movement manifested on the surface, such as the slight trembling of debris on the water. hipihipiprarou.

his father has given it to him. pe hiini a hipekema.

I call him father (= he is a classificatory father for me). kama ke iha ya hiimou.

father, elder male relative in direct line. imou.

son-in-law. hesiyopi.

crunchy. krãrikrãriwe.

to make love with legs tied. waku the ki rukeketai.

to make love. waku.

when I felt labor pains, I went to the forest. wa ninimou ha, karahi wa si he kema.

to feel labor pains. ninimou.

Prereimariwe followed (the scene) with his gaze. prereimariwe ke mamo wãri hutariyowei.

to direct one. hutariyowei.

to turn (something) halfway, to rotate 180 degrees (imperfective). mi ãhemiãi.

to turn halfway, to rotate 180 degrees (terminative). mi ãhemiprou.

to turn halfway, to rotate 180 degrees. ãhemi.

to make sway in order to make fall, to make a person fall by pushing them violently. wekepraamai.

the Yanomami would want to kill me to take possession of my wife. yãnomãmi the pe wãrini yare shei puhi ha topraoheni.

to seize, take possession of (a woman whose husband was killed, prey from a predator). toproaheni.

trajeron. yehipireherima.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to have persistent stomach pains, to regularly suffer from stomach pains. ninimomai.

to maintain an embrace. waporopou.

this will loosen (= this will come undone). the prohoai.

to let loosen, to let come undone (through negligence). prohopramai.

to loosen, to be loose, to tie loosely. proho.

variety of banana or plantain; Musa sapientum (Musaceae). This variety is a recent introduction among the Yanomami. haturimi.

to scratch a specific place. tikokokei.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to put the hand as a visor to look into the distance (a habitual gesture of shamans). kekamai.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

became spacious (perfective of the inchoative form). yaweterayou.

to make an object fall by throwing another object at it, to make an arrow fall from a tree by throwing objects at it. tishishiprai.

Rabipelado was already far away when he thought: "And if I flew. nãroriwe a payeketao waikiwe tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma.

to fly. perayou.

who has tilted the container for my seeds kashuhuri. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

a container for seeds. kashuhuriye.

to pulverize, reduce to ashes; to distribute (game, fish). kopehekei.

the two women sat down slowly in Honey's hammock. yãmonãmãriwe kama ke e thoo ke thoku ha suwe ke kipi re tipeariyonowei.

they sat down slowly in the hammock. tipeariyonowei.

to hit laterally. yayetiai.

you, the cowards, do not make love, let me do it alone. kirishiwe pe wãri, pe wãri kuwemotihe, yãmi ke ya ta kuwemo.

do not make love. kuwemotihe.

parrot, parakeet. kakari.

parrot, parakeet. kakari.

a large red stone axe was stuck in the smooth ground. poo ke the koshi pata wake si tãihiwe ithãoma.

smooth. ithãoma.

to become inferior, to become shorter (in height, length, duration, value); to stay behind, to stay short of a limit. hawekei.

to be tied/closed in that manner, plural objects, disposed. he itutuprawe, pl.

to be tied/closed in that manner. itutuwe.

designates various species of black ants. kopariwe theri.

designates various species of black ants, some of which bite hard and are very aggressive. kopariwe.

very close together in a line (animals, plants). pakomato.

I ask you to pile up the wood here in large quantities and in several piles. eyeha ãsho komi ta hiraapotuhe.

pile of wood. hiraapotuhe.

(various related forms). patikai, dur.

to crush, clean or extract by striking with an object. patikiai.

the kneecap is the shapono of the hekura. pei maheko re kui, ei hekura pei pe shaponopi.

knee, kneecap. maheko.

headdress of the hekura whose light is blinding and burning like the sun. watoshe mothokari.

who inclined (the container) of my kashuhuri seeds. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

seeds. uhuri.

He deposited the termite nest on the ground and broke it open with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

1. To open by tearing, rip the wrapping of a package with the fingers; break with the hand. 2. To hollow out the earth by scratching with the fingers. huresha.

those who were not working. pe re ohotamou mãoheni.

as she was pregnant and could not run fast, the jaguar killed her. the shipenapi yaro the haiprou ha mãoni irani a sherema.

as they did not want to give up, one after another they began to groan. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to be in the process of, to be ongoing. mãoni.

opposite of moyawe. mohotu.

Sorocuá white-tailed went to look for the product of the hunt. kurekurethaweni yaro re a koãi mi ukukema.

Sorocuá white-tailed (mythological ancestor). kurekurethawe.

plural of misipe. hopehope pe misipe.

thorny palm (unidentified plant) that grows on the banks of rivers. misipe.

to become dense (vegetation); to become obstructed. paimirayou.

to respond immediately or to react instinctively. nokarema.

saltarín, poseedor de mostacillas, cruza un collar alrededor de mi pecho, yo me engalanaré ante aquélla que, allá abajo, tiene hendido el extremo de un poste de su casa. kihi a no topepi re niyaope, weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, kihi totahi re sheteterati ke ki iha, ya ki kãi ta huyamou ta yaio.

to be split, to be separated (end of a long object). eteteprawe.

dye that was made darker. no ushia.

I cooked a casabe bread. nashi ya hiki rãmiãi.

to cook on a metal plate placed over the coals (perfective aspect of the incompletive form). rãmiãrei.

Its long pods contain. Sus largas vainas contieto volviera a salir).

pod. vaina.

it was his older brother who gave food to both of us. pe ãiwepini pehereki iyamama.

he gave food to both of us. ãiwepini.

1. to have a vertigo, dizziness 2. to lose all reference points, get confused, not recognize oneself 3. to regularly have vertigos. mi pe shiwãrihi.

to never give up. puhi remoimi.

Cachicamo ate all the honey and left. moro upe waa ha hititirini a harayoma (mit.

Cachicamo. moro.

I don. pokoayameri.

stay still (stop touching everything). hurii ayatou mai.

to rub, to touch, to take without asking. hurihi.

bone marrow. uhutupi.

to put to toast or dry as quickly as possible. shirishiri.

the ancestors transformed into sloths. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

to transform, to change. ifama.

(he/she) speaks of the south of the Orinoco: we are already undertaking the last part of our journey. p emaki peishokuai waikia ke a kure.

to undertake the last part of a journey, not to be too far from the goal during a journey; to approach. peishokuai.

my older brother went hunting. ãiwe a rãmi huma.

went. huma.

she (cries) raising and lowering over her head objects that belonged to the deceased. matohi ki kãi yokoai.

to raise and lower objects that belonged to a deceased person over one. yokomai.

en el lugar donde hay una fisura en la roca. pei maki pata yashootayope ha.

in the place where there is a crack in the rock. yashootayope.

to be a little thin, a little worn out by use or corroded by moisture. repisihi.

Kãrãnãri will make you fall. kãrãnãrini wa kemarei.

supernatural being of the yai the class; kicks those who climb trees and makes them fall. kãrãnãrini.

to make something more brown by mixing it with soot. ushuhumai.

when Siroromi got up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

squeeze for a moment. hutututou.

it is hard. the hihuwe.

to be hard. hihuwe.

I trace a line with onoto over my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to have painted a curved line from one ear to the other passing over the forehead. tiwarokei.

it grows naturally in the savannas, on certain plateaus or in certain mountains. ceba así cuando lo trepé; e naha a ha thani pe nas arbustivas, sobre ciertas mesetas o en ciermishiãki hamai kooma (mit.

savanna. sabana.

father-in-law, there is honey upriver. shoape, mihi himoto a kua ta kuraharuni.

to be located upriver. kuraharuni.

the turtle was approaching walking in a swaying manner. poshotomi ke a wai paroparomoimama.

swaying manner, like swinging, that turtles have to move. paroparomou.

Verbal suffix used to express the narrative present tense. -wei.

anteayer. weyaha.

to become completely rough, rugose, granular, stony. erereprou.

I met them at the moment when they were plucking a crane. ya waroakirioma, yãpi pe mi haihe tehe.

to pluck a bird, to remove hair from an animal before cooking. mi hai.

was. estaba.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepi.

when the plantains reached maturity he said: "go hunt animals for me". kuratha e pe hãmoprou tehe a wã hai shoaom a: "yaroye ke a ta thahe".

to reach maturity. hãmoprou.

I will kill it, I will make it cook (turning the broth), then I will eat it, I will eat it. ya wai ta yaio, ya wai ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

turning the broth. rerante.

I got a blister on my hand from the axe handle. hãyokoma pei hithoni ya imiki si poshoprariyoma.

handle. hithoni.

the yawari (a type of animal) also behave like shamans, they sing and dance like shamans. yawari pe kãi hekuramou.

to behave like a shaman, often under the effect of a hallucinogen; to sing and dance like shamans. hekuramorayou.

we went down the slope rolling with the arrows in the hand. shereka yama pe porani yamaki nihoropraakirioma.

with the arrows in the hand. nihoropraakirioma.

little brother, do not stray from the path, beware of snakes. oãsi, a paatihe, oru ke ki.

do not stray from the path. paatihe.

to fish (usually a feminine activity of catching fish in lagoons by forming a line and trapping them in baskets held in front while advancing slowly). yurimou.

they had gathered all the poles in the central plaza (that they needed for building the collective house). the pe hãto nahi hiraa haikipemahe.

they had gathered all the poles (that they needed for building the collective house). haikipemahe.

estoy apretando los dientes del picure para hacerlos saltar. thomi naki ya hayomai.

to detach, to make someone/something come loose. hayoai.

to fall and get caught. wahehe.

to have an infected eye. mamo ripupiai.

to have an eye that becomes infected. ripupiai.

high riverbank carved by the current. hishio no.

high riverbank carved by the current. ishio.

I raise the hammock, which is too low. yii ke ki yahatotowe ha ya ki isiamai.

let the tobacco grow well, above all do not dry it when it is still too small. pee wa naheki isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai.

to leave something to grow tall, to let something grow tall. isiamai.

to be alongside, to run alongside. wariri.

to come out of the ground (corn sprout). maturipiai.

1. Corn sprout that comes out of the ground. 2. Hisiomi grain too young to be harvested.. maturipi.

I will not allow you to take shoots from my banana plants. Yo no permitiré que saquen retoños de mis plátanos.

to be unstable, to wobble, to move or roll underfoot. kapuru.

it may be new (the knife) but it does not cut much. a ma tutewei a peheri namomi.

does not cut much. namomi.

he was wielding a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to wield, to brandish (something over one. yarehepoma.

abandoned path. wairemahe.

to become blind. hupepiprou.

his sister had called him (to tell him): "older brother, let's go eat honey, you will be the one to open the nest". pe yaini ke a ha nakaponi: "ãi, oi pema u pe ta watu, wa poape".

sibling of the opposite sex. nakaponi.

to fabricate a straight/rectilinear object. shaririprai.

she cooked cassava flatbreads and put them in a mapire (basket). nashi ﬁki ha rãmirãrini yoroﬁ si ha ﬁki thaprarema.

she cooked (cassava flatbreads). rãmirãrini.

to smell, to sniff, to sniff out a smell. fni ukukãi.

to smoke a cigarette (neologism). fsikariyo ukukuãi.

to smell, to sniff, to inhale. ukukuãi.

He brought the dry leaves close (to the fire) and made them burn. yãã henaki shiriki ha ahetetamarini henaki wake piyemakema.

1. Exceed, go beyond. 2. Spread, extend (a fire). 3. Pass from one support to another.. piyeai.

to catch the end of a fruit with the incisors and exert pressure to remove the seed from the shell (perfective, plural object). wãthemirãrei.

to feel itching in several places. shihitiprou.

to remove a piece of something by breaking it, to cut something by taking a piece. akatahuai.

to have the head turned. mi yaio.

to have the head turned. mi yai.

(they heard) the cries of the ancestors traversing running through the central plaza of the house. poreri pe miã kãi rerepeherima, yahi hami (mit.

they traversed running through the central plaza of the house. rerepeherima.

at the top of the hill, there where the path ends, they made me rest again. the mi re totopiyei ha, yo he haope ha, yare kãi wãshimi horuu re kopeiwehei.

to reach the ridge/crest (perfective). totorayou.

gizzard. koyopi.

to have one. yakekerayou.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

the scaffolding extended all around the Sipara rock. yashokamai.

he suddenly put his hand on the hanging leaves. henaki re teihiawei hami, imiki wãri wariprakema.

to hang down, to incline downwards (of leaves or branches). teihiawei.

trazarse líneas sinuosas sobre la mandíbula y las mejillas, partiendo de la comisura de los labios. kahiki tikeke.

to trace sinuous lines on the jaw and cheeks, starting from the corner of the lips. tike-.

it seems that those who went out to scout have just returned. pe pe pomai mi re aruhei ke, pe hoã waroa waikikei kuhe.

it is reserved. the pomiã.

to discover, notice something in the jungle; to be reserved (one realizes it by the specific marks left by the one who discovered it). pomiã.

go and join your husband (where he is located). heãroye ke iha a ta aruheriyo.

go and join (someone, in the place where they are located). aruheriyo.

to widen a little. uhehãi.

(related word). prewe.

the pijiguaos start to grow big. rasha ke ki primomou.

they start to grow big. primomorãyou.

to climb the thorny trunk of a pijiguao palm by means of two crossed sticks. hãikãi.

Pájaro minero. Watawatariwe.

to cover or mix with sand, to put sand in food carelessly. mrakatahupiamai.

(variant of a word from the south of the Orinoco river). hashi.

immortal people who live underground (like amahi wood, which does not rot). akrehe.

harpy eagle. Harpia.

the sugar cane of the yawari species is found far away from here. puu yawari u siki pata upraa he re yathehepe ye (cha.

far away, at a great distance. yathehepe.

to make a ball with an object to wrap it. haoto.

he is beautifully painted with sinuous lines that go down his whole body. the oni torerewe riyehewe.

to be painted with sinuous lines that go down the whole body. torere.

he made love silently, without anyone noticing. mamikai ke te pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to make love silently, without anyone noticing. nihorot.

plantain plant; Musa paradisiaca (Musaceae). terekerimi si.

plantain. terekerimi.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to disseminate, to space out. shororoprou.

he arrived at a place where there were scattered blue-headed parrots (in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema.

there some began to paint themselves (in a dispersed manner). ki-prawe hami ai the pe yãmoprarou.

indicates that several objects in the same state are dispersed. -prawe.

bird. anasi.

I forgave you (but I have not forgotten). pe nohi asipou poo.

to renounce or forgive oneself. asipei.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not withstand such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to shoot arrows at each other. thapraai.

there are many beautiful tobacco plants (one next to the other). pee nahe pata riyehewe yorukou tharei.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are crowded together there one against the other (= catch knife fish, roast them inside those leaves that are crowded together there one against the other, and then lick the juice from the roast that comes out of them). waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to grow in large quantities, to sprout in large quantities, to let weeds invade crops (through negligence), to stand in large quantities close together forming a compact mass. yorukai.

they lay on either side of him in a hammock. thoo ke thoku ha ke kipi parekea mi hetutua ha shoaikuni.

to lie/place oneself on either side (usually to eat); to place oneself on either side of a person. hetutukei.

the man went mixed with the winged termites. wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

mixed, intermingled. thaporeri.

to strain to defecate or fart. wãthemou.

the night fell immediately while the plumón (of the bird) was falling (lit. u pe tishishii tehe yetu ke e the mi titi ha fweshiki tisu.

to fall due to a blow. tishishiai.

who has inclined the palm spade where my kashuhuri seeds are. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

to incline slightly (an elongated object). yoteheai.

to be angry. wãroho.

to place long objects next to each other (durative). waririmai.

attack suddenly. keprakei.

term. oprou.

located outside the dwelling (temporary shelters). sipararithatrás.

remember it. puhi ta shoaiku.

to remember. puhi shoakei.

make the child come to the center of the group. ihiru a ta mi ãmopari.

to place someone in the center of a group or in the middle of the water. ãmoparei.

to suck by sucking in (like sucking sugar cane or marrow from a bone). wasusuarei.

the skins of the fruits without skin were scattered on the ground. mo warokoshi mi tikukuoma.

to have lost its pericarp (when speaking of eteweshi fruits), to have lost its shell, its covering (fruit); to have lost its skin. ierra.

(el recipiente que contiene) mis semillas kashuhuri está recubierto. kashuhuriye ke pe he yohoa kure.

covered things. yohoprawe.

edible fruit of the kãye hi tree. kãye.

manner that the koãmirimi siki have. koahimo.

to leave a little food. heprai.

to move by undulating the body. acentuanmomai.

to dent in several places. wãukupramai.

I will look for it going around (the place). hei re ya the taeai ãyokãi totihio kuperei.

to go around something, to circumvent. ãyotariyo.

to burn the fur/feathers of an animal before butchering and cooking it. fukukurei.

they burned the dead person today. hei tehe pe pomorayoma.

they burned the dead person. pomorayoma.

the yakoana drug will make you senile. yakoana ke a wãrini wa moyepimarei.

to make someone lose their strength, to make someone impotent or senile. moyepimarei.

by cause of them (the vines), because they do not break, I express my impotence and wonder how to do (if I want to clear the forest for cultivation). ya the pe wã feheprarai ha, the pe wetiprou ha mrakuni, ya puﬁ weti hamimou yaro.

to break in two (long object). wetiprou.

the pots are closed (by means of lids). hapoka si pe ka he kahuprawe.

closed, obstructed (plural objects). kahupraw.

do not inhale the plants of the Yawari, or they will take your pei mi ãmo. hei yawari pe yããpi hena koatihehe, wamaki mi ãmo terehe.

do not inhale. koatihehe.

to be satisfied after taking revenge for bloodshed. puhi kãi hutetewe.

to be full, to be satiated. puhi hutete.

he cut a short stick and put it in the prolongation (of a branch). horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tikemakema.

put in the prolongation (of a branch). tikemakema.

Moriche blanco bird; Cissopis leveriana (Thraupidae). Pikimari ãshi.

moriche blanco bird. pikimari.

Variety of pijiguao palm whose fruit is yellowish. wakewerimi.

you will accompany me to show me the places where there is honey. puu ke wa himiãpe.

you will accompany me to show me. himiãpe.

to touch once. tiprushi.

to make one path lead into another (when opening it). he hamakei.

motor, usually an outboard motor. mororo.

to have an erection. fmo hitatawe.

to become stiff, to become rigid. ﬁtata.

to let the cooking water of a food evaporate by neglect. wehemapei.

to bend, to curve, to twist. toyeke.

supernatural plant whose stem is hollow and has transverse partitions like bamboo. tikene.

she picked a tender leaf from a tree. hukereni : ella cogió una hoja tierna de un árbol.

pick a good amount of pijiguao fruits from the bunch and cook them. shimokore wa ki ha hukereni, ki ta tupa.

to pick, to pluck, to gather. hukereni.

he shot an arrow at a bird and the arrow got stuck (in the branches). kirithami a pehi ha niyakini shereka a hãkema.

to get stuck, to get caught. hãkema.

this does not reach boiling. the yorupraroimi.

it does not reach boiling. yorupraroimi.

to become sticky, greasy. sutiai.

that one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his conuco (he has no more plantains). hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to go on a visit to another community. hamamorayou.

dejar secar, prender fuego y esparcir las brasas. shirikimarini, wake yerini, wa ha yãrãreãrini.

to ignite. yerini.

cross it around my chest (= give me a necklace). weti ipa ke ki ta yakirapari.

to cross two elongated objects, arrange in the shape of a St. Andrew. yakira.

a small spiny palm; Bactris sp. (Arecaceae). moshohawe.

mai koko: peraman fish, sticky substance made from the resin of the mai kohi tree. mai koko: peramán, pez, sustancia pegajosa fabricada con la resina del árbol mai kohi.

tree. mai.

to start following at the back. shiokatou.

due to being pregnant, she cannot walk fast. the haiprou ha maoni.

to walk fast. haitou.

when the dawn broke. wawetomi wapoko.

dawn, daybreak. wawetomi.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and move objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) in order to search for something underneath them. Pokorariyoma.

I will not allow them to take shoots from my banana plants. ya the siki kararu tikaremai mai ke the.

to tell someone to separate a banana shoot from the mother plant, or to let someone do it. tikaremai.

to lie down or be lying down in the direction of the length of the hammock (with the body parallel to the edges). karereo.

I am dying. no kuwemi.

to be dying, moribund. kuwemi.

abundant, bountiful (said of clusters of pijiguao fruits hanging from a palm tree). yoakama.

he inclined towards the ground to listen (the subject is in a tree). the yimika wãri ha tapraikuni, the mi wãri ha tepraikuni.

to incline, to bend down. mi teateamo.

send the hekura to attack. wayurumou (cha.

to send the hekura to attack. wayurumo.

1. To cut a tree as close to the ground as possible, leaving a short stump. 2. To make an arrowhead from bamboo that is too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakoroai.

it is said of a pijiguao (palm tree) that is pushing me down. ikrekeai.

hot, warm. omoki.

(he/she/it) dreams. t thapimou.

dream. thapimou.

to dent or crease an object in one place. wãikikei.

whirlpool, vortex. motohewe.

termite (unidentified (animal, plant).); edible. ãotot.

1. Scorpion (unidentified animal). 2. Cricket, mole cricket (referring to the south of the Orinoco River). kirikirimi.

with circular movements (such as peeling an apple with a knife). shokekekai.

to have gray hair (perfective). irepirayou.

tonsure. fe roshi.

to play by throwing objects at each other. sheyeyou.

to place the arms along the body for a moment. wikokotou.

vine; Canavalia sp. (Leg., Fabaceae). thoki.

I desgrano maíz (I shell corn). yono ya mope hushishai.

los granos de maíz están apretados (en la mazorca) (the corn kernels are packed tightly on the cob). yono mope sute.

maize, corn. yono.

she cooked cassava flatbreads and put them in a mapire (basket). nashi ﬁki ha rãmirãrini yoroﬁ si ha ﬁki thaprarema.

she cooked (cassava flatbreads). rãmirãrini.

magnificent, Dormilona swayed in the middle of the group. wathaperariwe re a noshi harirawe krei kupariyoma.

to soften, to become soft. krããhãã.

to become lumpy. komokotoreãi.

the capuchin monkeys were moving towards us among the trees. yawerewe ke ki imiimama yetu yamareki wãri ayaa ha tikoreni.

moving towards us. imiimama.

ningún otro camino cercano. ai yo no pataopimi.

path. pataopimi.

they shot numerous arrows and the noise they made when falling was heard. the ha niyaakiheni, shereka ke pe ki re thohuthohumorurei.

noise produced by numerous arrows falling to the ground. thohuthohumorayou.

to drag someone forcibly by the arm. karerekei.

to have had an itch (perfective of the terminative form). shihitirariyo.

that can be smoothed; liquid that can be homogenized. kopehamou.

to be cold. wahatii.

he cleared the way by pushing aside the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand; to reject someone with the hand; to clear the way with the hand. hãiprai.

null. mapoori.

he wears a necklace of beads around his neck. tope ki harepou.

a thing worn around the neck. hareotima.

there where the giant cachicamo is, in its den, I will asphyxiate it (with smoke) and cook it. waka a re titirati, ya mishi ha tumaparini, ya wãri ta ripia.

to drown (in water); to asphyxiate an animal in its den with smoke. tumaparei.

to be vigilant and look around circumspectly. mamoku moyaweo.

to be vigilant and look around circumspectly. moyaweo.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not endure such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to fight. sheyou.

honey river. puutha ke u.

honey. puutha.

that's enough, that's all, that's finished (there's no more of that). fe naha re o enaha re ke: es suﬁciente, es todo, eso se acabó (no hay más de eso).

enough, sufficient. suficiente.

Perched on the tip of the tree, Woodpecker stretched his neck to look around. hii ke the hi wai ihete hami eshãmiriwe oraki kayahaapraroma.

to be perched in balance and stretch the neck to look around. kayahaapraroma.

the urine caused the tearing of the leaves. pei re niaasi peni yãã henaki hetimai kupariyoma.

to break an elongated object by exerting pressure on it, to tear, to produce a tear or rupture. hetimai.

the opening of the basket is narrower than its base. yorehi si ka iyoyowe.

to make a container whose opening is narrower than the base. iyoyoai.

he approached and spoke in a low voice. a ha ikuikuni a wã wahato wayoma.

to approach, to get close. ikuikuni.

to take/receive something that has been taken from someone. hukekei.

as I detest them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

to cook pijiguaos (a type of fruit) for someone. harinomi.

Move in a line (and silently), like the chachalas. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

1. to line up, align; 2. to align, tighten (the strands of a basket). shanini.

one and the other bathed. ke kipi yãrimoma.

they bathed (one and the other). yãrimoma.

to have the habit of navigating in a particular canoe, to depart in canoe one after the other. karepraai.

little child who does not yet know how to behave. mohotutawe.

to make bristle (fur or feathers of an animal). mãririprawe.

to make fall. fkemai.

it was because the woman was a scatterbrain that Teremi eviscerated her. suwe ke the mohoti kuteani teremini the re kakaprareiwei (mit.

because, for, as. kupire.

as it did not dawn they used up the firewood to keep warm. the pe he haruprarou ha maoni koã ãsho pe mi watherema.

did not dawn. haruprarou.

I have brought this bow to trade for a pair of scissors. Tijeras.

scissors. ãsimamotima.

those arrowheads made with shaishairami bamboo, which are dangerous: surely your quiver is still full of those. mihi shaishairami pe siki wayu totihiwe ta thare, the ki kaopou kore ke the.

to make enter by force, to forcefully introduce an object into a container that is already full. kaoai.

1. To bend, to fold (the edge or tip of a tool). 2. To draw up the legs, to draw up the legs in front of the genitals, out of modesty, when sitting on the ground (a woman). 3. To bend, to fold (once on itself) the edge of something, to make a hem on a fabric.. koheã.

they left (this morning) to hunt. pe rãmi ayou ke a kuroi.

to hunt. heniyo.

they circled around the rocky wall of the mountain at its base. pei maki kothe hami the pe ã y o r i m a.

to put below, to bring down. kothekei.

to perforate repeatedly (perfective aspect of the durative form). tiroshoakei.

may the demon of the celestial disc make me sick (by spitting on me several times). hei hetu misiriwe a peria re hearati, ware wãri keshai yaia ta pera.

to spit on someone. kesheai.

to make love (said by a man). wãewãemo.

to shout at someone. rahuprai.

there are trees in the forest. urihi hami hii pe upraprawe.

trees. upraprawe.

to hang low, to hang with a long rope. preyukou.

to be wide in all its dimensions. thepahawe.

to get dirty, to stain. shamiãi.

my fireplace is next to an exit. ipa yãno nanokaa.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. nanoka.

an apparition chased after me. poreni ke ware nosi hore ma re pou totihioimaprei.

apparition, ghost. poreni.

Its succulent roots are edible. Sus suculentas raíces son comestibles.

cultivated plant; Calathea allouia (Marantaceae). lairén.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

water. agua.

to join a group that is leaving. aushiramomento.

thanks to the felid's dye, our body paintings emanate a glow that constantly sketches a smile when we approach you (say the hekura). iraira noupeni yamaki oni sh kasi watewatemou no re kirioimi.

body painting, body decoration. noupeni.

to make a liquid go from a concentrated state to a less concentrated one. rehereamai.

to dilute, to make less concentrated or less thick. reherep.

they are already hung from the posts (myth). pukiwe (mit.

to be hung. pukiwe.

to have the habit of staying at home when others leave. hetahetamou.

food that has been cooked in that manner. frãrãrãma no.

to cook directly over the flame. frãrãrãi.

I have told the women, "cry for the dead, cry for the dead". suwe ya pe nowã thaa waikirei kuhe, "pe ta ãmoãmo, pe ta heri".

Don't shout, so your voice doesn't awaken my anger, I told you to stay calm. wã rahumotihe, pei wa wãni ware hushuo ka thaa tikoruhe, ya wã wasia waikirei ke a kurei.

to say, to tell. waikirei.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma (mit.

to have sleepiness for a moment, to always feel sleepy. maharishitou.

bowl in which banana compote is served to hosts during a party. karafa.

to be aligned (in a natural way). rãyoprawe.

I met them (in the sky, in the land of souls). ya kuo nareopeherayou kuhe.

(form that the directional vhv-rayo takes in the presence of the perfective -pe). peherayo.

we seized a woman in their house (pulling her by the arm). kama pe shaponopi hami suwe yama a shairema.

to seize a woman by force to hand her over to another person. shairema.

they killed váquiros and gave the broth of the cooked (meat) to drink (= they killed váquiros and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

the young men shot arrows at the fish. huya peni yuri pe niyamahe.

they killed, they shot. niyamahe.

brother-in-law, represent things lucidly, when you achieve it, manifest your anger. shoriwe a puhi ta wararaparu, wa puhi ha wararaparuni a wã waitherimou yaia ta perani.

to arrive at (after a moment of uncertainty). wararaprou.

I don. shoeshoemi.

you will make love many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already made love. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

to make love. wamo.

desamarra la curiara (canoa). kanawa a ta k u s h e p r a r i.

él desamarró el chinchorro (que cargaba sobre la espalda), y se acostó. yii theki a ha kusherini a perioma.

to untie, to detach, to take for oneself an object that is untied. sherini.

to succeed someone in a job, in a ceremonial dialogue. nomihiprou.

do not eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

to eat alone; to usually go to eat at a certain place (animals). shihimou.

sister, come closer. amiye, wa ha aheteikiyoni.

we have approached (the goal). pemaki aheteprariyo ke a kuhe.

approach a danger without realizing it. aheteariyo.

approach. aheteikiyoni.

the man went in company of the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). poretihe, ya ki nini thapoimi kutaeni.

to mix, to intermingle different objects. poretihe.

to be happy. ãyãyuma.

to stay for a while in a surrounding position. corokoprao.

to be hungry. marueti.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have done anything to you, they would have limited themselves to shooting you with poisoned darts (with a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to launch malefic substances by blowing through a blowgun. prothomorayou.

to put behind, to pass behind (factual of durative). ãyorimai.

to move hesitantly or falteringly. rãikikou.

corn husk. yono mosisi.

husk, shell, sheath. mosisi.

they (two) produced shavings in the ceiba wood, and these transformed into many bocón fish and hatate. mahe siki re yakekapiiwei mãrohã, hatate pe pruka kuprou shoaoma.

They produced shavings/chips. yakekapiiwei.

defect of an arrow that tends to spin when shot. yãweyãwewe.

to open in several parts. wateteai.

to make a deep cut in a tree. mi shoekeãi.

to have the stomach swollen, hard and painful. ipreterayou.

to go around something to avoid it. ãyotou.

to pulverize, reduce to ashes; to distribute (game, fish). kopehekei.

it fell. hi tiheke i.

to fall. hashishi.

kill without hesitating. puhi asimopimi.

renounce to an aggression or a vengeance (perfective). puhi asimorayou.

not renounce ever to a vengeance or aggression. asimo.

you name Ayukumariwe, you pronounce its name, do not lie, do not lie. rai ayao, horemotihe, horemotihe.

a spiritual or hallucinatory entity. Ayukumariwe.

my ear unblocked. ya yimikaki homoprariyoma.

the palm sheath opened (releasing the flowers). rasha ãthe homoprariyoma.

1. To unblock, open up (e.g. an ear); 2. To appear from behind clouds (the sun); 3. To split or tear lengthwise (e.g. a plant sheath); 4. To germinate, sprout. homoprariyoma.

I approached the place where the gallineta was singing. hãshimo ya wã ahetemakema.

approached, drew near. ahetemakei.

is he/she still alive. a mishiã hai shoawe.

is alive. shoawe.

eye. ojo.

to stretch, to extend. shai.

to place a vine on the ground in order to provoke a confrontation between two sides, in a game that consists of pulling the vine to drag the opponent out of their field. kareretamai.

to pinch someone with the nails (once). tiriai.

He deposited the termite nest on the ground and broke it with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

1. To open by tearing, tear the wrapping of a package with the fingers; to break with the hand. 2. To hollow out the earth by scratching with the fingers. hureshe.

headdress of the hekura with the appearance of a specter. watoshe pore.

to have wrinkled buttocks. ruwe.

that morning I went to hunt the toucan. mayepi ya pe niyai henão kuprei.

past recent (within the previous half day to the act), it is obligatorily used with an imperfective or a state (implies duration: the development of a process or an activity, the duration of a posture or a state). henão.

the woman was truly pregnant. suwe a shipenaa ha yairini.

the woman was pregnant and could not go fast. suwe ke a shipenapi yaro a haiprou maoma.

to be pregnant. maka*.

aspirate the soft pulp. wãpumiai.

to have a limb that suddenly emerges (out of the water). shorokoprakei.

I will prick up my ears to listen and name without mistake the regions inhabited by human beings. yimikaki ha asheparuni, yãnomãmi the ki re pauna yekei, ya e the ki urihipi ãhã ta katita.

to listen attentively, to prick up one. yekei.

the multistriped tilingos have transverse lines on the chest. piremari koshi pe pariki yãpruta.

to have several lines or several transverse stripes. yãprutuwe.

the mother kept the daughter seated next to her. pe niini pe thee ke the hore tikemapou aheteoma.

to tell someone to keep something/someone closed or in a certain position. aheteoma.

to extend one or the hands. imiki poshoko.

we will make love. pemaki ta kuwemo.

let me make love alone. yãmi ke ya ta kuwemo.

to allow someone to make love. kuwemomai.

Õmawe advanced crouched so as not to be seen and quickly found himself close (to the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei.

to sneak, move quickly crouched to approach an animal or enemy. tereteremou.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin (perfect, delayed incompletive). turekerayou.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

to compress, crush; to press against the ground, to keep an object in place by putting a weight on it or applying pressure with the hand. hiki.

both of us are ugly and bad, and we have insulted each other. peheki wãri wãritiwe yahatuayou totihio ke a kuhe.

to insult each other. yahatuayou.

your ugly face is the only one covered in smoke. wa puhi wãri wakeshipi kua ayaa kurawe.

covered in smoke. wakeshipi.

bow made from wood that is not hard enough. faraasi nahi.

immature, unripe, not hard enough (for making bows). araasi.

saved (the infant) by giving water (to feed it). mãu u ha a mi thapoma.

saved (the infant) by giving water (to feed it). mãu u ha a mi thapoma.

en cada ocasión, él hacía como que iba a subir, pero (en seguida) renunciaba. the wãri tuo kuyeapraroma.

to give up, renounce. -praai.

to reach the summit one after the other. matotopraai.

to suffer from strabismus. aharawe.

she did not cease laughing because her entrails were causing her tickles. a ikãpraroma, a hushomi ha shikioni.

she did not cease laughing. ikãpraroma.

because of Bachaco, his mother-in-law got lost and metamorphosed. ko yeri we pe yesi a ha yakemarini a shi wãrihipramarema.

to get lost, lose one. ake.

(he/she/it) started having a cramp. iyo.

to start having a cramp. iyo.

dictionary. pehitho.

I will expect this to happen. ya puhi kãi peritaope.

I will expect this to happen. peritaope.

to have attacked (perfective aspect of the factitive form). shurukumarei.

to become less and less visible in the dark. aroshoprou.

I protect my magic plant with a barrier (of small stakes planted around it). heri ya ithorokopou.

to protect an object, dwelling or camp by building a fence around it (of palm leaves, branches or stakes planted in the ground). ithorokopou.

tomorrow I will cut a pijiguao palm, and on the way I will fabricate a club (with it). henaha rasha ya si tuyei, himo ke ya thapraheripe.

to fabricate (something) on the way. thapraheripe.

niece, I'm going to break the dry branches (hitting them against the ground) to warm myself. shete, pokopokoye ke ya wãri yahekiai.

dead wood, dry branch. pokopoko.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, to warn, to advise. yimirãrei.

to tear apart an animal from a gunshot at too close range (and which will bear fruit). kohihiprai.

to feel a violent pain. prahaimati.

the arrow broke when hitting (something). shereka a yahecuprou shoarayoma.

to break when falling, or as a consequence of a shock (an elongated object). yahekiprou.

sin. de tepepraai. tepetaai.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

to scratch, to graze, to cause a superficial wound. yahe.

to be pointed, sharp (rock). shiririwe.

to become deformed due to repeated blows against hard objects (the edge of a tool). shokekeray.

to smoke (something). weke.

you spend your time going up and down the watercourse (to come and steal cambures). rokomi wama ãsi pe nape hore mi wereweremou ma kui.

to go down a watercourse repeatedly, to be always going up and down a watercourse (with a specific purpose). wereweremou.

to remember, to recall. ayayeprou.

you sleep while they make love with your wife. mio hearewe wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe.

to make love. hearewe.

to cause suffering. niniãmãi.

if you refuse to do it I will throw dirt at you (to punish you). mohimou mai, pe pahuprapei.

to throw dirt (sand, mud) once at someone, to punish a child that way. pahuprapei.

to throw an object at something else, to make an arrow fall. tisuaprai.

he slid his hand along the strings of the hammocks. pei re the pe peki hami imiki waroroataroma.

to slide along. waroroai.

to have a moldy taste. cahotetiwe.

he has been gone for a long time. yetu ha a ayoherima.

he/she/it has gone away. ayatariyo.

you will not retain them. kafeni wa wã titipou mrai ke the.

retain, remember. titiãi.

no permitió a su suegra dormir. pe yesi a miã shi hihirimapoma.

no llegó a quedarse verdaderamente dormido. a mio shi hihirio yaioma.

did not allow to sleep. hihirimorãyou.

you will remember this. wa puhi hatukeope.

to remember, to recall. hatukeo.

to be hungry. mishinama.

Ekoayoma dragged Sherekanawe by grabbing his arm. ekoayomani sherekanawe ke a ipiaherima (mit.

to seize someone by the arm or hand (to hold them back or pull them towards oneself); to forcibly attract a woman by grabbing her arm. ipiai.

el árbol de aguacate floreció por primera vez. ãhãi ke hi hapamou.

aguacate (avocado tree). ãhãi.

he undid the ropes that held the lianas of his hammock in place. thoo thoku he kushesheprarema.

my older brother comes towards me and lies down in my hammock made with lianas. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

hammock made with lianas of the masimasi species. kushesheprarema.

they make the earth crumble to reach the otter. proro a wãri pakekaihe.

to cut an animal into pieces; a completely butchered animal. pakeka.

to be partially clean or white. aushia.

to be angry. ikuiku.

1. To make the fur of a dog glossy (by feeding it well). 2. Factitive of tãihiãi (to smooth, to polish).. tãihiãmai.

to improve, fix, repair; to order, classify. totihitamai.

when we get tired of living in the forest we return to the communal dwelling. yamaki periai ha mohipraruni yamaki kooma.

those who live (plural subject, dispersed). periprawe.

1. To abandon the communal dwelling to live temporarily elsewhere (in a camp in the forest, at an ally. peri.

I will go look for powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will make them rotate towards you. wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make something pivot or rotate. sha.

to fill up (a place). hithokãmai.

when the apparitions enter the empty house, they stir up the fire by pushing the embers (to warm themselves). yãno proke hami pore pe hai tehe koa wake popohoai.

to make this in a fire situated in the middle of the central plaza. koa wake popohokei.

to be twisted only at one point (perfective, delayed inceptive). torokorayou.

los niños comen la pulpa de los cucuritos raspándola con los dientes. ihiru peni kareshi pe wãhehãihe.

to bite, to scrape with the incisors. wãkeke.

I do not take it into account, I persist. ya nape he prakehea ha totihiikuni.

to persist, to insist. totihiikuni.

grain, seed of a vine. pokora mo.

seed, grain of a vine. pokora.

me di cuenta de que le habías regalado vestimentas a la gente de Tokonawe. tokonawe theri pe rii ha wahe siki ma re hipeakenowe thai.

place name. toko.

that's how the pijiguaos are. kinaha rasha ke ki k u w e.

Thus, like that, like this. kinaha.

I have malaria. ya hurapi.

to have malaria. hurapii.

I have the impression that the plantains are beginning to ripen. kuratha pe nami hapa shopoherii.

to begin to ripen. shopoherii.

bocachico fish, chancleta fish, Ageniosus inermis (Ageneiosidae). mokashiko.

oily, greasy, having the consistency and appearance of oil or fat. tapi-tapi.

to scream in pain. hiyohiyomou.

to start flattening the end of an elongated object. tatahaprai.

I will come anyway. ya huu kuyeheo mai ke the.

due to what you just took out (from me), my anger will not end. pei wa hore ma terehe hushuo kuyeheo mai ke the.

not to modify one. kuyeheo.

that knows the guns. a no kopetapi re taope.

knows. kopetapi.

when you gathered the bones of the cremated dead, did you carefully search (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

to search for an object mixed among others, to search for scattered or intermingled fragments. oruruprou.

1. (intransitive) for a bowstring to tighten by itself when wet; 2. (transitive) to tighten a bowstring by twisting it; 3. (state) for a bowstring to be tightened. hãto nahitha ereke.

to knot, to tie a knot. moshokore.

place my mouth on top of that. pei ke wa femaka ha yare kahiki makea totihire.

to place on top of something, to place on a fire or rack. makepei.

to give shelter to someone; to keep an object close to oneself in one. perimapou.

it is your arrow. sherekahe ke a.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

stay sleeping while they make love with your wife. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo (mit.

your. RN.

Ciempiés regresó sobre sus pasos. kumã rãroriwe ke a yonii mi ha paoimani.

Ciempiés. yoohoami.

to feel very well (physically or mentally). totihitarariyo.

to direct or incline the tip of an object towards the ground, to make hang, to cause a depression or sinking. wereamai.

Zoology, casiragua, spiny rat; Proechimys (Echimidae). Zool. Nocturnal rodent that lives on the banks of streams, its cries resemble barks a little. , casiragua, rata espinosa; Proechimys (Echimidae). Not consumed. Roedor nocturno que vive a la orilla de las corrientes de agua, sus gritos se asemejan un poco a ladridos.

casiragua, spiny rat. thohomi.

to take out a part of a whole to give as a gift. shetekekei.

to drag an object to the center of the dwelling, to receive from another a woman who has been taken by force. shaipei.

food that can accompany another. tehiamou.

(example sentence). ai nomawe ke the pe kasheshewe opi pokeai tehe, pe hayuyou.

to float, to appear briefly on the surface of the water. poke.

when the disease demons descend from the sky, a red light emerges from the chest of omãyãrithawe. omãyãrithawe ke pariki wake homoprou mi ha paoni, kama re pe ithoprou re tehe.

maleficent supernatural being of the yai the type associated with the rainbow. omãyãrithawe.

he obstructed the opening of the cavity where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

entrance, opening, passage. horeawei.

they are always crying in the forest (after a mourning period). pe hoyããimi.

they will find you if they look for you. wa hoyããyoruimi.

This word is part of various idiomatic expressions. hoyããimi.

to open the eyes, to wake up. reitou.

there. allí.

following Woman-palm the songs are directed here. hokosiyoma a nosi yau hami, ãmoã kãi re rereimahei.

Woman-palm. hokosiyoma.

we have cut firewood to cook the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

firewood. tariki.

my eyes became red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

to have red eyes; to have the beginning of conjunctivitis. wakepei.

I told you that I want to paint myself with onoto (and if you don't give it to me), I won't share with you the necklace of beads. nana ya yããi puhi ha topraoni, ya wã hai waikio.

to take the decision of painting oneself. waikio-.

to turn over an eyelid. mamo kasi yoreai.

to turn over (an eyelid by playing). yorekei.

as we do not have a shotgun to hunt, I will kill you with my arrows in turn; this is the speech of the upriver people. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani, ihi a ma kuini pe wãri prapou mi fetuo ta totihio.

did they then go there, hungry, looking for food. kiha pe wãri oﬁri taeo mi fua pashirayou ma ta kuhawe.

to speak a distinct language or dialect from the local speech. kãhiãmo.

he let his arrows mold. kama e ki shereka rohomarema.

to let mold (through negligence). rohoramai.

the horomato trumpet is in the extension (of the respiratory tract). pei orãmi ha horomato pe he timón.

trumpet, tube. horomato.

to be grooved or channeled circularly by natural causes. yawete.

I was still walking on the path when night fell on me. pei yoka hami ya huu shoao tehe ya he ka komãrayoma.

at night. komãrayoma.

they asked me to go with them and I accompanied them. ware ha nakaheni ya huo nareopeherayou.

they asked me. nakaheni.

to start suffering muscle pains. hayeheriai.

very large lizard (unidentified). ithoroko.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly under or above a surface, to move under the surface of the water, behind the clouds (celestial body). urururãyou.

to have attacked (perfective aspect of the factitive form). shurukumarei.

I will eat it. cometohipi.

(verb root meaning . shoke-.

insect, tree. ãshih.

they are always pointing their guns at us: let them shoot then, no matter. kopeta a shiro hore puhuraihe ha, niyaai poohe.

no matter, it doesn. poohe.

hallucinogen whose effect does not last. wayu horotowe.

don't laugh at me. yare noka ikãi mai.

Horomãmi laughed mockingly. horonãmi a noka ikãm a.

did they not kill one of mine. fyare noka ikãi ma re kuhei.

to laugh mockingly, to mock someone by laughing. ikãrãyou.

(speech of upriver). moshotomi.

1. to grow (human), 2. to make an arrow a little longer than usual, 3. to be a little long (arrow). tirehai.

Rahararitawe came later bringing cassava sticks (to plant). rahararitawe re e nashi siki perai mi huu re heoimaiwei.

bringing. heoimaiwei.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, become larger than. morokãi.

(it) speaks of the south of the Orinoco: the sun inclines towards the horizon. the misi pata yahatotoherii.

the sun inclines towards the horizon. yahatotoherii.

to be about to have someone paint two oblique lines crossing on the nose. yakirapramou.

they made love (perfective). wamorayou.

fried banana slices. kuratha hãrikã no.

fried food, ready to be consumed. hãrikã.

[he/she] gathered vegetables for himself/herself and his/her family. ni thaokei.

I return to the forest upstream to gather food (vegetables). ya ni thao mi fuu koã ke a kure.

to gather vegetables for oneself and one. thaokei.

that has hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

that has hurt me. hamirayoma.

to trace a line. hetiti.

the child did not go down. ihiru a ithonomi.

did not go down, did not descend, abandoned. ithonomi.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. siki utu.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. utu.

to make viscous or sticky (durative, plural object). yãrekãmai.

to make something collapse or crumble in a place. hishishiakei.

I am sleepy. ya maharishi waikiwe.

little one, have you woken up. pusi, wa maharishi mraa waikirayou.

to sleep, to have sleepiness. maha-.

give it to me for nothing. no mai ha a ta hiyo.

offer me a curare tip for nothing. ipa no mai ha namo ta totopa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

for nothing, without payment. no mai ha.

to have the custom of offering boiled bananas to others. frokomi ãsiki weyepou.

banana. frokomi.

frog. shãkohã.

they took him then to a savanna. pirisi a hami a kãi hoã waroa mahikemahe.

savanna. mahikemahe.

to cause the appearance of red spots on the skin (sun). teãyããmai.

they met, without knowing it, at Honey's hearth. yãmonãmãriwe ke hãtopi nahi ha ke kipi re kuariyonowei.

honey. yãmonãmãriwe.

it results hard when touched with the foot. the kapamou hihuwe.

results hard when touched with the foot. kapamou.

Yoawe was observing when he perceived a woman. wãrishewe ke mamo yeo tehe suwe a tararema.

I observed the path for a long time. pei yoka hami ya mamo yetaoma.

to look at, observe, watch. mamo ye.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

to visit someone at their house. Yoroporiwe.

to have felled several trees by making a larger tree fall on them. yashokorarei.

the child starts to take the breast. aka hesi keo: el niño se pone a tomar la teta.

to enroll, to coil. i1.

skin put to dry. hithorema.

to call someone, to receive visitors. horomorayou.

upon arriving he stuck his machete into a post. kama e siparapi shatia shoamapeheroma.

even though the package of fish was burning, upon arriving he remained still. yuri e hãro ma ishii tehe a wãri kutaa shoapeheroma.

to do something upon arriving. vhv.

sandy, containing sand. mrakatahupi.

to doze off, to fall asleep. hererewe.

his spouse was transformed into stone, with his arrows placed against him modifying (qualifying) it. pe heãropi pei ke ma kuprou waikirayouwei modiha, shereka ke ki ha waririmareni.

to modify, to qualify. modiha.

do a lot of that. the no wãrowe ta peai.

the cow is very fat. ware a no wãrowe tapi.

as it was raining a lot I was wet and cold. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

in great quantity, a lot. wãrowe.

I have itches in various parts. the shihiti piyekewe.

to happen repeatedly, to recur. noti.

to become light red. momihiprou.

no hace mucho tiempo que ellos han derrumbado la tierra de la cavidad donde vive la babilla (para matarla). mothoka ke a fukirio mrai, tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute, pei ke yoshi ha.

cavidad, guarida de ciertos animales. fukirio.

to go down a slope. wetei.

spotted antbird (Thamnophilus punctatus). pishewe.

to pile up (fruits). porororariyo.

to have been extended. katia.

to close the eyes for a moment. misi mitou.

I don't understand (or: I don't hear). ya wã hiriaimi.

I'm tired of hearing that. ya wã wahu hiriai mohi.

understand (what is said, a foreign language). hiriaimi.

to split, to take out in several pieces. pashishai, dur.

to split, to cut superficially. pashishi.

it is not visible. a taproimi.

not visible, cannot be seen. proãproãmi.

to have been squeezed completely. ãhuhã.

to receive a cut object. wetipei.

Jaguar was left behind, and arrived weakened by hunger. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

to be weak, without strength; to have lost vitality; to have wrinkled due to the sun (a tobacco leaf). yahato.

my mother. na*.

in. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit. they smeared their eyes with the brains of Rabipelado, it is said in the myth. ).

to smear, stain or dirty locally. hãhikei.

they all surrounded him and beat him. komi e pe he hã hãyopraruni, a sheremahe.

when we had finished surrounding them, the enemy warriors did not respond. wayu pe ã hai mi hetuonomi, yãnomãmi re the pe he hãyoprou tehe.

they began to surround us. yamareki he hãyopraremahe.

to surround, to encircle. hãyoo.

we eat the honey and then we go on our way. puu yama upe ha koararini yamaki kurayoheriiwei.

we go on our way. koararini.

later I will go to show you the seeds. waiha, ya moku himiãwe.

the daughter of Deer showed her the manaka palms. hayariwe ke theepini manaka siki a himikema (mit.

to go to show something to someone. himiãwe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. fniya hupamou maorewe.

to go to war and not expose oneself to risks. maorewe.

he arrived at an empty house. yãno a proke ha the koprou re kukeiwei.

to return (to one's starting point). fkoprou koo.

to arrive, to reach. fkoprou.

don't the red partridges have a beak that curves sharply downward. pokorami pe husi he wai ma re wahohoi.

the pokorami birds have a protruding chest. pokorami pe pariki terehewe.

a type of bird (possibly a partridge or dove). pokorami.

object that was scraped off. shorera.

to find one's way again (after being lost), to find the right direction again. fyo shi kateheprou.

to disentangle (durative aspect). katehou.

only the yawari possess the bamboo (for making arrows), which grows in dry places. yawari peni rihu pe u nohi thapou kuporahei, weheti ha u kuami (cha.

dry, place where the ground was not flooded. wehetiwe.

were hanging. colgaban.

to become a Yanomami; to live, behave and speak like a Yanomami. yãnomãmiãi.

it was your older brother who burned the vegetation. ãiwehe ke a ishinomou kuperei.

to burn vegetation. ishinomou.

to fan. yare.

to rub something with the fingertips to remove adhered material (wet sand, dirt, mud, etc.). horokoãi.

to take someone by the arm. aga- iri misi.

to take by the arm. aga-.

to gather, to join, to reunite. ira.

extend the head (to look), mount on something to reach an object. hiyãhããi.

do not inhale those plants. peni wa thaprareihe.

inhale. thaprareihe.

to have circles painted on the body. rohehe.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to get a bruise. hãepotopiai.

to free oneself abruptly from someone. hapara.

to stop giving goods, to no longer want to participate in trade exchanges. imarariyo.

to deceive oneself, to nurture false hopes, to be mistaken about someone. mirãrayou.

to be lying down without sleeping; to fail to fall asleep. shimaka.

the Waika that live there. fnini tihetiprou.

object long that is elsewhere, far away, in the interior of the lands; that can be cut into pieces. tihetipramou.

the váquiros are detained (one after another). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were numerous rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be stopped/detained (plural subject). fhothotho.

Rabipelado glanced (towards the scene that was unfolding). nãroriwe the re mitareiwei.

to glance, to take a quick look. mitareiwei.

to make a longitudinal mark, to scratch someone, to cut someone, to damage a roof with a machete blow from above (longitudinally in relation to the petioles of the leaves that cover the roof). yakekek.

to join the hands. fimiki prouhutou.

to join the hands. prouhutou.

to be angry. irahenami.

tell your mom to prepare her hammock made of vines for departure. naahe ke iha thoku thapramai ta puhi.

to prepare a hammock made of vines for departure. thapramai.

wait for fruits to ripen before picking or eating them. wãkirei.

hacerlos vomitar (to make them vomit). siparani ya pe tuyei mamer.

to make vomit. mamer.

to let something deteriorate (by negligence). hotemai.

to install hammocks one under the other and in different places. pepipramou.

to be the only one who falls ill. mohothamorãyou.

force someone to give something. kanaãi.

they did not do as you did, they were not lazy like you. kahe ke wa owemama.

to imitate, to do the same as. owemama.

he fell into the water and drowned. a ha keparuni a mishi tupariyoma.

fell. cayó.

to attack enemy shamans. fhekura shurukai.

it seems they want to attack me at all costs and I'm still waiting for them. ware niya hoã shurukai he yatiprouhe ha ya pe no ma re tapou shoai.

we intend to attack them anyway. yama the pe niya shurukai he ha yatiokirini.

to attack. shurukai.

tears. usiki.

I will go later, I am waiting for the sun to come out (from behind the clouds). waiha ya hupe, mothoka ya homoãmai pario.

to wait for the sun to come out from behind clouds or fog. homoãmai.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepiprou.

to become soft/mushy (unripe fruit). koshiai.

Tiger snake hunter. Erpiente tigra cazadora.

hunter. cazadora.

to trace a line over several objects. yãprutaakei.

to become salty. mositiai.

como la madre (de su nuera) no dejaba de llorar, el padre de Tucán se compadeció de ella. pe nii e miã he weyaa ha mayepirithawe pe hiini e ã nohi ohote thaarema.

compadecerse. thaarema.

to crumble, to collapse (durative 2). hishishou.

I go to look for wood with others. koã ya ãsho narei.

to participate in an activity to obtain part of the product of that activity; to request or obtain part of the product of an activity. narei.

I will go down there to live apart and open a clearing. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e thoothoomokiriowe.

to chop down a tree, to cut a tree. thoothoomou.

the thing that produces fear. kiritimi.

I drove away the hekura with the smell of burnt meat (smoking). hekura ya pe yashua totihirei, yaro pe ni ishirini.

to smell burnt. ishirini.

to stick, affix multiple objects. utiakei.

to form breasts (of a girl reaching puberty). ãmiprou.

they would have liked to tell him to do it with others. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

to participate in an activity, to do something with others, to be in the same state as others. topraoni.

to become darker in a place. hutekei.

fruit of the yawara hi tree. yawara.

let an enemy escape. he hihoataramai.

loosen, make looser. hihop.

to become light, to be lightened. herehe.

to speak. hawathoko.

the demon moved its harmful finger in a zigzag over the stomach. pei maka ha yai the imisi wayu pata hipoyemou (cha.

to move like reptiles, to progress in a zigzag. hipoyemou.

put yourself behind me (to walk). pei ya nohã ha a ta kutho she.

behind, back, backwards. fnohã.

Gather the leaves, we will spread them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to spread, extend. patheri.

they transformed into beasts. yarorariyo.

he breaks. yaharoko.

to let an object get wet from the rain. pathemai.

to cry for a dead person (lit: to throw mucus). fishihipi hoyai.

to have a runny nose, to have a cold. fishihipi.

we approached and went down to the river. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

to go down, to descend. prape.

to make (someone) splash once. fhamishamai.

to drool (when asleep or sick). kahu upe yãnão.

to drool, to slobber. yãnã.

they penetrated into the conuco (they crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hay u o m a.

they crossed the morichal (and left it behind). eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

we, the ones who pass (the river), are the people of Shitoshito. s h i s h ito theri yamaki re hayuope (mit.

to pass, to leave behind, to cross, to traverse a space from one edge to another. theka.

female spirit that enters the bodies of shamans when they take hallucinogens, causing them to clench their fists and convulse. yãruanayoma.

the old man was dragged dead on the floor of the house. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

to drag a long object on the ground. hiririremahe.

to put something around. hare.

we advanced along the river. yamaki hiriroherii, para u sipo hami.

to coast, to move along, to advance following the bank of a stream. hirirou.

I hit the tima tree to collect honey, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to open (a hollow object). paweheai.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was moving where the others were passing. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

to disperse, scatter (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoikuni.

that gives the urge to vomit. the pariki shi harihamai.

to cause numbness or the urge to vomit. harihipramai.

head painted with longitudinal lines traced with the blood of the moon. shiema ãshi shetiti.

to trace a line. shetiti.

go downriver to look for cambur palm fruits, carrying the bunch in your hand. tapitapirimi ke ki ta yepikirio.

To lift; to carry in the hand (with the arm hanging down). yepikei.

during the night the inflorescence of the manaka palm will bend downwards. titi ha manaka ãthe mi wereprariyo.

downstream, downriver. wereprou.

(related form). hopoko.

they did not enter (our house), they passed the night going around it. pe hanomi, pe ãyoãprarou he harutoma.

to pass the night going around. harutoma.

Moro approached (the tree hollow), went inside and ate the honey. moro a ha ihetaruni a rukea ha shoariherini, puu u pe watayoma.

to approach, to get close. ihetaruni.

they gathered perhaps a package of magic substances. heri pe hãro norãmi hokeremahe.

Horonami blew (the deadly substance), and he fell immediately. horonami a horaprai tehe a kea shoa yoma.

magic substance. horeprema.

to begin to. hapresheprai.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. katikikema.

to move a person away. koa wake shetekeai.

to move away. shetekeai.

to cut transversally into several pieces. hahetimai.

to cut transversally into several pieces. hahetimai.

to start making round, spherical. komoreprai, ponerse a.

to start making round, spherical. komoreprai.

when the belly of the woman exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

object long broken into several pieces. tipuruwe.

anhinga. cotúa.

the turtle was approaching walking in an oscillating manner. poshotomi ke a wai paroparomoimama.

walking in an oscillating manner, like turtles swaying as they move. paroparomoimama.

hoja enrollada en forma de cono. hoshokorema.

Siroromi skinned the man who was screaming in vain from pain. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to scream in pain. eaimo.

He also put his hands on the front posts supporting the roof. hehã nahi pe hami kãi imiki wai wariataroma.

Keep your bow tensed. nahi ta iyopou.

1. Pole or post supporting the roof of a communal dwelling or shelter. 2. To construct a temporary shelter or communal dwelling. 3. To tense a bow.. naﬁ.

in company of. pohori.

cerca de mí coloca un chinchorro (= ofréceme un chinchorro). hei pei ya mi thari ha ke ki ta prapraa.

chinchorro (hamaca). prapraa.

in all the places where Nosiriwe had spit, tobacco plants began to sprout. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

where (he/she/it) had spit. kesheoheripe.

to reserve a discovered product in the forest (by marking the place and telling others not to touch it). pomipou.

in the Montede-la-mujer-que-tiene-sus-reglas the ancestors gathered honey (of the ami ushi species). suwe roope keki ha poreri peni ami ke ushi tuyema.

Hill/Mountain of the woman who has her period. Montede-la-mujer-que-tiene-sus-reglas.

after a long time they ran out of firewood, and then they felt cold. yãkumi totihiwe koã the ãsho pe ha hititiarariheni, pe wahaturayom a.

firewood. totihiwe.

I walked a little and fell into a hole. ya hutou tehe thekatheka hami ya kekema.

hole, hollow. theka.

to leave a part of something for someone else. ayamakei.

to have engendered a male child (in a ceremonial dialogue). fipa ya he okãpe.

I broke off (with the hand) a piece of the hallucinogenic paste to offer it. epena ya kekema.

throw me the loincloth. wayuko ta sheyepa.

to tie, to bind, to attach, to fix, to unite, to engender, to offer, to hang, to open, to blow, to throw, to go down, to arrive, to produce, to disappoint. pe.

the hummingbirds pierced the top of the ancestors' skulls and sucked out their brains. poreri ke the he mono ha, teshori peni he tiwehepema, he yoshi pe ukukai shoaoma.

he pricked the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

to give an injection. tiwehei (neol.

to reach or hit someone in the eye or head while doing something. tiweherei.

to move through dense vegetation and not be visible. hithethou.

progresamos lentamente río abajo, unos después de otros. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

slowly. hirihou.

exult, rejoice. yokei.

to become dense, thick. sutiti.

to be full of. mãthoyãhipi.

to be soft, flexible. u ka horahora.

to be soft, flexible; to swirl, make eddies (of water). horahora.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

1. to separate a portion of meat by breaking it off with the hand, in order to offer it; to take a bit of tobacco from one. hakoko.

because of Bachaco, his mother-in-law got lost and metamorphosed. koyeriwe pe yesi a ha yakemarini a shiwãrihipramarema.

because of that, the path was lost and could not be found again. the naiki he hore tiraprou ha maoni, naiki yakeamai ha shoataruni.

to get lost, to lose one. yake.

the dog chased the tapir. hiimani shama ke a nosi tereherima.

you who are there, go with your dog to kill agoutis. miha kaheni poshe ke ki ta shema hiimahe ke a wãri iha.

dog, pet animal. hiima.

he never comes. a huu taomi.

never. iyataaruni.

to decorate an object or a person by imprinting a hand painted with colorant. raokoai.

he put water and smoothed his hair with it. wãri hokokooma.

he tied the capuchin monkey's tail around his head, and smoothed it with his hand. ha yohoreni, the teshina hokokama.

to smooth, to caress, to massage, to rub (during a shamanic cure). hokokama.

but they put the fish to roast on the embers. yahe pe waa ha ropataarini.

they put the fish to roast on the embers. ropataarini.

Tigana; Eurypyga helias (Eurypygidae). shererea.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshoko.

to receive a strip that has been torn. makokopei.

to pile up, to heap up. heruyutuai.

to clear. si tãihi.

in the hole of his earlobe he had inserted parrot tail feathers. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the shinaki huurema.

parrot. huurema.

to scratch oneself with an object. si hikekeo.

to scratch oneself with an object. hikeke.

to tie firmly, to fix firmly. rohothoprai.

a large red stone axe was stuck in the smooth ground. poo ke the koshi pata wake si tãihiwe ithãoma.

smooth. ithãoma.

the pava rajadora was at the top of the tree (and was not visible). mãrãshi a yaokokema.

to be at the top of a tree or branch across a dense space, and for this reason, not be visible from below. yaokoo.

I stretch myself. ya utuo.

is that your voice. kahe wa wã.

he thought it was the puffing of a jaguar. ira ke a wã puhimanowei.

when. wa.

daughter-in-law (wife of son, sister. thathe.

the river is rising. u petii.

to be full, to be satisfied (perfective form). petirayou.

the tucans have the tip of their beak curved. mayepi ke pe husi mi ora ma re wereawei.

curved, bent downwards. wereawei.

I have cold. ya wahati.

they are two orphans. wahati ke kipi.

to be cold, to have cold, to be an orphan. wahati.

to cover the ground in various places (generally of ripe fruits). tikukuprawe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). ikãkã.

to receive an object that has been untied. kushepei.

to have the thighs separated, to separate them. yorakei.

to change one. kuyetaai.

to make love (a woman) (lit. fnaka pata yãshãmap o u.

certainly it is here where she has made love. eyeha the kahiki pata yãshãmapou ayaonowei ke the.

to have open, to be open. yãshãmap.

"This is a banana", it is said. "ya ta hokeri", pareami.

it is said. pareami.

yes. awei.

The Yanomami paint themselves black when they go to war. pe wayu huu tehe yãnomãmi pe ishimou.

1. to burn, set fire to, ignite; 2. to blacken, stain black (locally); 3. to paint or stain the body black. ishiãi.

I take beads (I grab a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to catch, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãorei.

to fit poorly, to insert imperfectly, to close badly. hietikei.

acuesta al niño. ihiru a ta perimaki.

he took a large stone, as wide as that. e naha maa re ma pata rerahawe kuwe, ma hokerema.

to widen, to extend (a surface), to expand. rerahaa.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). wãrihito.

to have become, to have been, or to be flat at one point and nowhere else. tatahaa.

The beehive, he dropped the pieces and went down. mpió el nido de abejas, dejó caer los trozos y bajó.

beehive, bees. mpió.

we will catch up with them (after having traveled a certain distance). yama e ki waroaharayou.

indicates that an act will be carried out at another place, at a certain distance from the place of utterance. aharu.

to become bitter. koãmiãi.

1. to thicken (a liquid), to become slightly pasty; to soften a little, to become malleable 2. to thicken a liquid, to make it slightly pasty; to soften, to make malleable. yãhihi.

this does not reach boiling. the yorupraroimi.

the day did not end and the ancestor was already awake. pe the mi harupraroimi totihiwe ha porepore a rãi ha kuparuni (mit.

not to start/not to reach. praro.

1. to become numerous, 2. to make in large quantities, 3. numerous (state). yahara.

to be surrounded, to be crowded. hithokoprou.

when Horonami saw Aparecido, he/she/it kept silent. horonami poreawe ke a ha tararini, a matha re waitariyonowei.

he/she/it kept silent. waitariyonowei.

I will go to the powerful hekuras' houses, and direct them towards you (making them spin). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make an object spin or rotate many times. hãmorimai.

those in the surrounding position [he ithorokokei, perf. mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i: "ei re the wai kua waikia kupe": aquellos posición de cerco [he ithorokokei, perf. ; he ithoque (knowing the region)] knew that that stream of water was the last (they said): "this is the last (there is no other)". ; he ithoque (conociendo la región) sabían que esa corokoprao: quedarse un cierto momento en posirriente de agua era la última (dijeron): "ésta es ción de cerco.

knowing the region. ithoque.

to run after someone, to chase someone. nosi rereamai.

to run after someone, to chase someone. reremarei.

to soften, to make something soft, or to deflate something locally. ãsiãi.

sinuous stream that forms many meanders. u shokekewe.

to be sinuous, to have numerous meanders. shokekewe.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and crush your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to repel, to push away. heturuni.

to be hungry. thãhi.

1. To separate, by pulling with the hand, the breast of a bird. 2. To peel green plantains or bananas with the hand.. krerokreromou.

to construct a mobile platform consisting of two crossed and tied sticks, in order to climb, without hurting oneself, the thorny trunk of the pijiguao palm; to entertain oneself by constructing a temporary shelter (a child). yaritharei.

to accompany a person (or a group of people) on different occasions. nokatou.

Despite the lack of food, I grate a little manioc and thus manage to eat. nashi ya wai ha hirikikini ya kaihou shoatakei.

To manage to eat a little in a time of general scarcity. kaihorayou.

you will not have me killed by the hekura. yare pesi yehiai mai ke the (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to be killed by a hekura (during a ceremonial dialogue). fpesi.

to make slippery (terminating). takrapramai.

he is cured completely. a temi heikiagou.

to be in a certain state or condition completely; very. ithorokoverbo.

to feel itching in several places. shihitipiprou.

untie those fruits and give them to me. pei wa the pe ha kusheararini ei ke the ki ta hiyo.

to untie, to unbind. kusheararini.

squat in a line one next to the other on the platform. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to squat in a line one next to the other. rãyokei.

we moved at night. titi ha re pemaki huatarou haruu.

to do at night. faru.

having become covered with a film (likely due to bacterial or microorganism activity). hererepirayou.

arch yourself. a mi ta yãpreketaru.

arch yourself, bend upwards. yãpreketaru.

to collect tobacco for oneself by cutting with the nails (perfective). tirirei.

he wanted to see if it had seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open a fruit longitudinally. eririprarema.

when day broke, she rubbed tobacco leaves in the ashes (= prepared a quid), got up from her hammock, and set out. the mi haru tehe, tihekio pee nahe ha tihitaarini, the ha hoketaruherini, a hurayoma.

to rub tobacco in hot ashes to prepare a quid. tihiruai.

to carry, transport an object placed on top of a load. heakapou.

to be located at the stern of a canoe to steer it; to take control of a motor vehicle (neol.). koropou.

we advance towards you, a light ãmoamo plant inserted in the hole of our lower lip. yamaki husi ka no ãmoãmopi hena karei ta kuikiyo (cha.

a light plant. ãmoamo.

Deer had Arrendajo as his son-in-law. hayariweni ãyãkorãriwe a siyoha poma.

son-in-law. ãyãkorãriwe.

to vomit. kanosipe.

the sloth's hair is very resistant (it is difficult to break). ihama upe tihekiomi.

not to break, to be resistant. tihekiomi.

to add salt. mositiamai.

to make someone/something fall. shikopiprou.

to shell corn. yoagua.

to do evil things, to practice witchcraft. fwãritiwe.

when I die (when my house is cold). yãno si ahio tehe.

when I die. yãno.

I am afraid. motuã ãhi.

to be afraid. motuã.

lizard with bluish tail (unidentified animal). riprou.

but as I did not stay still, it (the hekura attribute) turned back. kamiye ke ya he ha reshiproni a he tatokema.

to turn back, to go back. tatokema.

suwepiye: first person possessive, my wife. suwepiye: primera persona del posesivo, mi esposa.

my wife. suwepiye.

to lose or throw away several objects successively. hoyaakei.

expr. fa hohoruã re tetere.

1. to snore loudly, 2. to decrease (water level). tetere.

to become dusty, to get covered in dust. hekãhekãpiãi.

to receive an object that someone else has obtained from another person. piyemakei.

to have protected oneself in that manner, or to be already protected. hikoromorayou.

he is angry. ya hushuo.

to get angry. hushu.

the earth crumbles. mashitha a hishiai.

it was no use putting stones (to plug the holes), the water undermined the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

being undermined, mined (perfective). hishiarei.

the female váquiro ancestors were moving in the center (of the herd). wareriyoma mi ãmo hami pe huma.

designates a female hekura or mythical ancestor. -riyoma.

to be spacious locally. hauhua.

Provides good wood for firewood. ahotonawe kosi hi.

tree; Gustavia sp. (Lecythidaceae). ahotonawe.

I don. kurararahei.

to address the community, give a speech, express complaints, give an opinion on a matter, incite to work, recount a dream, etc.. patamou.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to put the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekai.

I will claim the goods at the moment when the demons of dusk push my hand away (claims are not made during the night, at the time of the ceremonial speech, but in the morning, before leaving). weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hããihe tehe ya ta nako sho.

to extend the hand in front of oneself to prevent an evil being from approaching; to reject someone. hããihe.

the Yawari possess batatas in large quantity. yawari peni pruka huko mo pe thapouhe.

possess in large quantity. thapouhe.

your friend. no rimihe.

his/her friend. pe no rimipi.

friend, person with whom one has a relationship of exchange. rimiye.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved, whose opening is twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

twisted, curved. -tapari.

to cause to be finished. shikopipramai.

this is the place where they bite the still too hard moriches and also it can be The word 'masi' in Yanomami means 'palma pequeña'. heyeha re pe the masi pe wãri hore oai.

exocarp, outer red part of the moriche fruit. masi.

thanks to the soap, no doubt it will become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to become clean/white (perfective, plural object). aurariyo.

to bend, to curve something. ithoremai.

to loosen a little, slacken. prehuhu.

the day comes again (lit. yamaki he wakakai koã.

1. To be in a certain place at dawn. 2. To tear or rip incompletely, to tear at the edge.. kakai.

to leave someone in ignorance, to forget to inform someone. mohotumapou.

to cut a portion of a fruit, remove a piece or slice by cutting from the stem to the opposite end (as a melon is cut); to cut a more or less round object in this way. hakaroai.

to hurry to leave a place behind while moving. piyetai.

en el lugar donde hay una fisura en la roca. pei maki pata yashootayope ha.

to stretch (a line). yashoko.

Punta de bambú sin. hohotowe.

do it without wasting an instant. the ta thaa moyaweaprara.

as they had harvested honey without wasting time, we drank it (mixed with water, as a drink). puu u pe thaa ha moyaweapotuheni, yama u pe koarar e m a.

to do quickly, to do without wasting time. moyaweaprarama.

to illuminate (with a flame, glowing embers waved in front, or a torch). hisikou.

he conversed in a low voice. a wã wãhãniniwe wayoma.

speak in a low voice, emit a faint sound. wãhãniniãi.

it is necessary that you inhale the hallucinogenic ayukuma regularly (ceremonial dialogue). ayukuma wa pe wãri ha koaprani (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

hallucinogenic. ayukuma.

(a word used in the southern Orinoco region). ishãpina.

The doctors gave me many injections, they were the ones who saved me. totoro re peni ware ha tereshãpraheni, ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuh a h e i.

to be riddled with holes or punctures. tereshãi.

numerous kashi ants float on the edge of the water. para u kasi hami kashi pe pruka karorowe.

to be on top of the water, to float. karorowe.

to speak badly. yãnãri.

they came here upriver in a canoe to harvest fruits. kanawa ke a ha the pe pehi kãi mi ha yãmoimani the pe ni thaom a.

to go upriver. yãmoimani.

Õmawe sat with his back turned near there. omawe ke e roa ha payekeikuni e humapi reoma.

to sit with one. payekeikuni.

seje palm with thick fruits. haprua masi.

to lie face down on the floor (in a hammock, on a branch, etc.). yarehoo.

do not be afraid when young people direct bamboo-tipped arrows towards you. ihiru pe rahakapi mi re puruhouwei ha, pe kiritihe.

what do I care that you direct your arrows at me. ke ki mi wãri puruhamai ta pera she (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to converge, to head in the same direction; to have one. puruhouwei.

to cut in a circular manner, to remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimonene.

shaken object, shaken tobacco leaves (in order to remove excess ash before preparing the wad). yaisa no.

to shake off (e.g. ash from tobacco leaves). yaisa.

to stick out one. shipeteai.

Arena. fekatahu.

with a little cord of the "whites", with this little cord, I will strangle you. nape ke ãsithani, friyawa ke ani, pe orãmi shiãri.

the foreigners (the "Whites") possess many cords. yawapi (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

thin cord or thread. friyawa.

I have a desire to chew tobacco. nahe karepou shi toprao.

to chew. toprao.

mata a las hormigas konakona con brasas, golpeando tizones entre sí. konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to start doing something. yashishiprai.

gala arrow that the hekura possess. shereka piremari.

gala. piremari.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

to scratch, graze, superficially hit (when shooting an arrow). tiheheai.

while they were holding Hokotoyoma, they scraped his skin. hokotoyoma a huwepipou tehe, a hoãpii re kukeiwei (mit.

to scrape skin. hoãpii.

to put behind, to pass behind (factual of durative). ãyorimai.

to remain a long time in a surrounding position. ithorokotao.

to repeat what was heard (often distorting it in a biased way). wãnomorayou.

to renounce. proprokai.

to accompany a person (or a group of people) on different occasions. nokatou.

he has stopped breathing (he is dead). a herekou mrat a r i y o m a.

to breathe. hereke.

to have hair. miki prukakaai.

to have hair. prukakaai.

to separate, to detach. eha.

watch out. fmihami.

watch out!. fmihami.

the great jejenes exterminated the Yãnomãmi, they ate them all. peti nakini yãse nomãmi the ki waa hititiararema, the ki haikipracuñado, arárema.

to take something in its totality. haikipracuñado.

the konakona ants did not delay in climbing. konakona yetu e the pe wãri torereapraroma.

to climb. torereapraroma.

fruits on the lower part of the trunk (speaking of the pijiguao palm). yakrikirayou.

fruits on the lower part of the trunk (speaking of the pijiguao palm). yakrikirayou.

I stepped right on top of a snake lying on the ground. oru ke ki praope ha ya ki poushoku re katikireiwei.

I jumped over a puddle, and went and fell right on top of a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki pesheku re katikireiwei.

to fall or step right on top of something (e.g. a snake). katikireiwei.

gather. amai.

1. To dawn, for the day to break. 2. To begin to recover, to begin to regain consciousness (when under the effect of a hallucinogen).. wakaka.

That man. Peripo ama.

man. peripo.

to place something on the ground near the lower part of the roof. prathei.

they left me on the banks of the Amiushiwe river, downstream. amiushiwe u ha, koro u ha, yare kãi re kupariyowehei.

river name. amiushiwe.

I have already whistled in the ceremonial dialogue manner. horoimorayou.

to break a piece off a round object by striking it. yaresheai.

I will try. ya the ta wapa.

1. To try, attempt, dare. 2. To experience, try, taste. 3. To measure, compare. wapeai.

drizzle. maa remaãshi.

drizzle. remaãshi.

(myth): it crouched to jump, it went up, it went to the sky. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to crouch to jump (animal). pusututou.

do not let the path become silent, since they claim goods (lit. yoku matha waiamai tikootihe, wamaki ma re nakouwei.

to become progressively silent. waiai.

those who did not commit incest. the pe shi re katehei ke the pe.

those who did not commit incest. katehei.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

I speak frankly, not hiding what I think. hoyãomi.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take a bit of tobacco from one. fako.

to start doing something. haikiprai.

to get stuck in (something). ya tokuu te.

to get stuck. te-.

we are dispersed and that's how we advance. pemaki rãkokowe ke pemaki kurayoheri.

to be dispersed. rãkokowe.

I followed closely. ya nahi ikoikomama.

following closely. ikoikomama.

this will loosen (= this will come undone). the prohoai.

to loosen, to be loose, to tie loosely. prohoa.

Rabipelado estaba lejos desde hacía tiempo cuando pensó: "¿y si volara. nãroriwe ke a payeketao waikio tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

if volara. perayou.

the maize began to grow in a vast area. yono mo haa aka praukua re shoarayoheriiwei.

I will go away. ya no mraa shoarayoherii.

to begin, to start. shoarayoherii.

how quickly the gossip spreads. kurahe wãno pe ma re imikouwei.

to spread quickly. imikouwei.

plural object. thorohai.

(he/she) is drying/toasting it very quickly. henaki ta shirishiripra.

to dry or toast something very quickly. shirishiripra-.

when (he/she/it) arrived at a certain height, they made the trunk swell up. peshekutohorayou tehe, hii ke hi hurumapirema.

when (he/she/it) arrived at a certain height. peshekutohorayou.

to roll (a round object). toreremarei.

they (two) made the tree swell/inflate. hii ke hi hurumapirema (mit.

they (two) made the tree swell/inflate. hurumapirema.

the pijiguaos have many bunches everywhere. rasha pe ikreheprawe.

the pijiguaos (a type of palm tree) have many bunches everywhere. ikreheprawe.

the ugly man was sitting alone, at some distance. wãritiwe yãnomãmi a re kui e yãmi roa payekekema.

to damage, deteriorate, ruin; to be bad, ugly, malevolent, evil; to be in bad condition, to be of poor quality. wãriti.

to form, to come out. thorohoai.

it is because I observed the place where you fought. wamaki wetiayope ha ya mamo shatikema kutaeni.

the place where you fought. wetiayope.

Bot., planta. Este nombre designa a dos planlos de la misma familia, que crecen en suelos húmedos o a orillas de las corrientes de agua: Heliconia revoluta y Heliconia hirsuta, bijao (Heliconiaceae).. yatayata.

snake. clelia.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to divide, separate into parts. shereke.

the woman was seated on the sand. mrakatahu a kuope ha suwe a tirereoma.

to sit or be seated on the ground. tirereo.

cultivated plant; Canna indica (Cannaceae). pakoarimi.

sit down. a ta roiku.

sit down (southern Orinoco dialect). a ta roiki.

perfective aspect marker. ke.

llévame así, pon mi boca contra tu nuca. eyeha ke ware wãri yeﬁi, pei ke wa femaka ha yare kaﬁki makea ta totihire.

las mariposas estuvieron a punto de pegarles en el hocico. hurari peni pe hushi mori tuyea tikoaparemahe.

nape, nuca, hocico. tuyea.

to be painted with oni haheti wavy or sinuous lines. foni eyekewe.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted with a light reddish-yellow tint. yãmonãmãritawe a petariyoma, a oni frãihiwe totihitawe (mit.

to draw, adorn with motifs and designs; to write (neol.). oni.

father-in-law, there is honey upriver. shoape, mihi himoto a kua ta kuraharuni.

to be located upriver. kuraharuni.

the centipedes persisted in biting the Waika people. suri ke peni waika pe nini waiamaihe (mit.

they tell us (two people) not to return. pehereki nohi waiaprai.

1. To persist; to pursue. 2. To refuse, to prohibit. 3. To choose a victim (human or animal predator).. waiamaihe.

I waited for the paují to land before shooting it with an arrow. paruri ya ha romakini ya niyaprarema.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the váquiros scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

I shot it with an arrow. niyaprarema.

to roll while falling. yoriri.

(he/she/it) swims lightly under the water surface, like a fish. pe nahe mope ureu si, purinama usi.

to swim lightly under the surface of the water, to move along the surface of something; to begin to sprout. ureu.

to fix the feathering of an arrow. ta*rarei fshereka he okãpei.

to fix the feathering of an arrow. ta*rarei.

to remain seated for a while. roprao.

wait a little, you will go to see my older brother when night falls. waiha ke the weyai tehe ãiwe ke wa wãri mii kootãyope.

when night falls. kootãyope.

brown-crested flycatcher. niyosirimi.

to not take revenge, to not fulfill blood revenge. puhi kãi uprao.

father-in-law, make the bee droppings fall (multiple times). shoape, pei aruku ta kemarari.

to perform or cause to perform an activity that affects multiple objects. marare.

he is in the forest. urihi hami a kua.

he is over there. kiha a kuatayoa.

to be, to exist. kua.

the corn began to sprout in a vast area. yono mo haa aka praukua re shoarayoheriiwei (mit.

to begin to grow/sprout in a vast area. shoarayoheriiwei.

to tear, to rip. feti.

sun. waraka.

the ketipa leaves tear easily. ketipa hena si sheaai si ihehewe.

to let something tear or break by negligence. sheaamai.

I am no longer a little child (humorous antithesis, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

little bird that is just starting to grow feathers. akamakapi.

to be born, to grow (a plant). kau.

to come from the bottom of a hole or den (noise). fwã hai pawewe.

to accumulate at the bottom of something, to form a deposit; to live at the bottom of a den (animal). paweprou.

they have the firm purpose of prohibiting him from participating in the war. pe niya wapekepou totihia kure.

maintain a prohibition. pekepou.

he left the canoe at the edge of the path that leads to the river. kanawa kãkema.

the canoe is in its usual place. kanãã.

to leave something somewhere. fkanawa.

I am carving a bamboo tip. r ahaka ya kopemai.

we will prepare bamboo tips like these (to go to war). e naha rafaka ke pe kuwe pema pe ha kopemani.

to prepare, smooth the shaft of a bow or carve bamboo tips. kopeprai.

approach a party. ahetepara una ﬁesta.

to approach, to get closer. ahetepara.

1. to become thin, lose weight; 2. to remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. tireshe.

his nape is completely stained with blood. pei ke pe orahi wai iye hititiwe.

hang it from my neck (the axe). pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari.

to speak. oraki.

when he/she arrived at the shore, he/she sat down for a moment. pei u kasi hami a waroo tehe a wãri rotapariyom a.

he/she/it sat down. rotapariyom.

then don't do anything repugnant. wa the pe shami thai tikoo mai.

to do something dirty, to do something repugnant or impure, to commit incest. shami thai.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, really making me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

they made me stagger. totihioheni.

he is my husband. heãroye ke a.

(in the myth) they placed the woman's body below, her husband's above. pe suwepi e pepimakemahe, pe heãropi e hiki hetumakemahe.

to call someone husband, to have a husband-wife relationship with someone. heãromou.

husband. heãropi.

it is he who has thrown it away. ihini a hoyarema.

that one. ihini.

the tree is getting caught on another one. hi mi thorukuai.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or due to a heavy load being carried). fhuu mi thor u k u w e.

to bend, to curve, to fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; to get caught on another tree when falling. thorukuai.

to tie, to bind, to fasten with a very tight knot or loop. prohohai.

I will cover the wapu fruits with water (while they are cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to cover with water a food that is cooking. paopei.

1. to become disheveled (hair), 2. to dishevel someone. porukuai.

we did not take any women, they were all ugly. suwe yama pe toanomi, pe wãritiwe haikiwe ha.

to take a woman, to marry a woman. toanomi.

to be always criticizing or scolding. wã pakehou.

to speak from upriver. pakehe.

dark, obscure. weyata.

the tree is tangled. hii hãã.

to be tangled (a tree), to have gotten caught. hãã.

to roll and squeeze tobacco leaves prepared with ash into a wad. pee nahe humiãi.

to squeeze, to press. humi.

fire. fueki.

don't think that we don't know how to take hallucinogens (= don't think we are bad shamans). epena yama a koai toproimi pewe tao, pe puhi kutihe.

not to be able to do it, not to achieve it. toproimi.

he became "pregnant" in the calf (lit. hei the pe re euhuawei ha ihiru a yetea shoakema.

to swell, dilate, progressively increase in height (of an elongated object). euhu.

to kill a male person. frahaka hãwete.

"they have killed some of our enemies" is what you will hear said (lit. "rafaka re pe hãwetekema fa tharei", wamaki yimika kuu totihiope.

to shake or remove the bamboo tip from an arrow shaft. hãwethã.

richal. shimokore.

to stay behind for a short while. ãyoriprao.

I have a cough. ya thokopi.

to have a cough, to be sick with a cold. thokopi.

banana. cambur.

he pricked the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

he/she/it pricked/stabbed with the tip of a branch. tiweheamama.

to feel stomach pains after people from another community have seen one. maikaprou.

I will go work in the fields when it stops raining. the weheyo tehe ya hikarimope.

to dry up (pond, lake, during dry season); to stop raining. weheyo.

to damage, to ruin, to deteriorate. wãritipramai.

I stirred the cambur compote several times. tate ya uku yakoretaama.

to stir circularly, to remove damaged part of food by making circular incision, to remove hot food from boiling water by stirring liquid in a circle. yakore-.

I will not stay still, I will go live elsewhere (lit. ya he ononoo totihio mai ke the.

to not take one. ononoo.

rock cock bird. ehoãmi una.

rock cock. ehoãmi.

to allow someone to have a borrowed object for a long time. mahimapou.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically (perfective). imiki yokorayou.

to have carried a load by supporting it on the shoulders with a strap. pakatamarei.

to have oneself tonsured by someone else (perfective form). hopramorayou.

to split, divide, separate a part from a whole. shererekã.

to be affected by a supernatural being or a malefic substance. yokekerariyo.

(he/she/it) interwove logs or pieces of wood to sit on. parithakei.

to interweave logs or pieces of wood to sit on (and isolate oneself from the ground). parithakei.

I am closing the mapire (tying its edges). yorehi ya si he itutuai.

to close a basket by bringing the opposite edges together and tying them. itutuai.

we call each other shouting, we call each other. yamaki pokomayoma, yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to shout (once) to call or attract someone; to call the hekura (newly initiated shaman). pokomiãi.

line up (on the platform) one next to the other. wamaki tikea he rãyoã ha shoaikuni.

to crouch aligned one next to the other, to line up one next to the other. rãyoãi.

it is up there. isi hami the kua.

on top, at the summit. fisi hami.

a jaguar almost devoured us. irani wamareki mori waaprai kuhe.

the jaguar dragged the dead woman while the child was perched on a tree. irani suwe ke a nomawe re shaireheriiwei, ihiru a ma tikeo tehe.

jaguar. irani.

to have become thin, to be corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisirayou.

disperse quickly (each one in a different direction). pe ta rereo shoaomopotu.

disperse (each one in a different direction). shoaomopotu.

the spirit omawe koheriwe took possession of my pei no uhutipi and masticates (devours) it. omawe koheriweni ware a no uhutipi ha ipirekirini, ware a no wãi uhuti ta wãshikiãkirire.

it masticates (it devours). wãshikiãkirire.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe). mi ãmo prou kasitamai.

to approach the shore (when in a canoe), to place something on the edge, to be on the edge (having been placed there or having gone there), to be apart, to be on the periphery, to be dispersed in the forest in various camps. kasiki-.

knives, knives there were, but the two children have spoiled them and there are no more. kushiyo re pe kuoma ma kui ihiru ke kipini pe ha wãriãpini a kuami totihiwe.

knife. kushiyo.

to roll while falling. yoriri.

Õmawe and Yoawe ate apia fruits. omawe sho, yoawe sho apia ke ki wapima.

to eat fruits. wapima.

to be afraid. pohoru.

the moon begins to wane. peripo a ayakosiai.

the moon begins to wane. ayakosiai.

I will become blind. ya hupepirayou.

to become blind. hupepiai.

to have given birth (a woman). reshirayou.

(he/she/it) fell or slipped. t tiikiprou.

to fall or slip. tiiki.

to that one over there perhaps he would have also liked to accompany me. kihi sho yaheki koshekã no kororai ta totihikepi taani.

to move in a very small group of two. kororo.

to reflect. maamaamo.

to start walking or moving to the front for a while; to move to the front of a canoe for a while. oratou.

a type of plant from the Cyperaceae family with small, spherical bulbs used in magic, usually to bring luck in hunting certain animals. mamoki.

he went to look for worms in a place where there were many rocks. maa ke mape hothothomope hami kohoromi shiki torarema.

he collected worms in a place where rocks stood up. maa ke mape hothothopramope ha kohoromi shipe torarema.

to look for, to search. torarema.

(he) rolled his eyes with half-closed eyelids. mamoku hiyãhãrãyou.

to roll one. mamoku hiyãhã.

to cause to have pain. hãmori.

the woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now. mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma.

it is floury (lit. the wamou hashitiwe.

to be dry, not to be flooded. hashitiwe.

extend the hand (for me to give you something). imiki ta totoiku.

extend the hand. totoiku.

I will fart in your face. pe mi horaprarei: te voy a echar un pedo en la cara.

I will fart in your face. mi horaprarei.

(he) wanted to see if there were seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open or gut multiple animal objects longitudinally. eririrarei.

the child approached, he stopped in front of him (and said): "father, father. ihiru re a ikukema, a upraa fa wariritaruni : "fape, fape. ". ".

he stopped in front of him. wariritaruni.

to have developed multiple blisters on the hand. thorohorariyoma.

my brother-in-law wanted to spend a second night, I stayed with him. tahiapi ya he weyarayoma.

to spend several nights, to stay for several days. weyarayoma.

to have a mark in one place. namo ka yakekea.

to mark. yakeke.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax in his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to soften by crushing with the fingers; to crumble in the hand, to crush leaves when abandoning a path, to have luck during a search. hurukuai.

select, choose carefully. tooai.

to become sticky. husupiai.

it is clearly distinguished (noise, voice), it is heard clearly. wã yawereai.

to be clearly distinguished (noise, voice), to be heard clearly. yawereai.

to submerge oneself. shototoai.

to steal several objects one after another. thomipraai.

to drool under the effect of a hallucinogen. fkahu upe hai.

to make one's mouth water. fkahu upe suhao.

saliva, drool, spit. kafu.

to transport without effort a heavy load. herehepou.

after that you will put other logs on top. ai ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

to put on top, to cover, to envelop. heakamamai.

deja de agitarte. a ta yãnikitaru.

stop agitating yourself. yãnikitamai.

give something to someone completely, receive something from someone completely. hai!.

you young ones, go there to hunt for me. ihiru pe, miha yaroye ke a ta thahe.

go there to hunt. yaroye.

to cause to spin around, to cause to pivot around an axis, to cause to rotate. shimoremomai.

the conucos were far away, downstream. rotao kuperei.

Rabipelado was already far away when he thought: "And if I flew. nãroriwe a payeketao waikiwe tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

to move away, to distance oneself. -prao.

they found the black-painted (dead) sorcerers scattered on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

scattered, strewn, spread out on the ground. tikukuw.

ellos se convirtieron en coatíes. yarushe pe kuprou shoaoma (mit.

coatí, zorro guache. yarushe.

to dry by heat of fire, to smoke. teteke.

I see the snakes with certainty. oru ya pe he haai.

to meet up with a group of people who are moving; to meet someone, to meet again in the jungle. he haai.

upriver speech. Potomawe theri.

upriver. Potomawe.

they are said to be placed close together. fu re hirikãi.

to be placed or standing close together in a row. hirikãi.

after my departure (on the occasion of your death), the fragments of your calcined bones will be thrown out (from the mortar where they will be crushed). wamaki ishi pe wãri akatahu yutuhou heowe.

outboard motor part, spare part of a motor. fmotoro akatahu.

piece, fragment. heowe.

(antonym). mãro.

Brother, they approached. apa, pe re prakerihe ye.

they approached. prakerihe.

the noise fades away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to stop gradually (noise, voice). manashiprou.

his wife picked a tender leaf of the wapu kohi tree. pe suwepini wapu re e kohi hena tuku hukerema.

tender leaf. hukerema.

hurry up and climb quickly to cut the vine. yetu re.

to climb quickly. tutatutaikuni.

they put (the two) a capuchin monkey tail around their heads. wisha shina pe yohopiararema.

to tuck the tail between the legs (dog). shina kareretou.

tail; plume. shina.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to have persistent stomach pains, to regularly suffer from stomach pains. ninimomarei.

that one that I call "the bearded one" looked like his younger brother. hirapore, ki naha pe f eeshe ke e kuoma.

spider weaver (numerous species). hirapore.

to let rot (through negligence). ruthaamai.

to stay underneath. pepitao.

to hurry up, to rush. haiki wasurarse, apurarse.

to do something with the intention of. haiki.

to extinguish a fire located in the central plaza. ãkikimapei.

with his blowgun, he projected a dart in the direction of the momo fruits that hung in clusters. momo kosiki mi shimokore re weteteatayouwei ha the horaama (mit.

projected a dart in the direction of the fruits that hung in clusters. weteteatayouwei.

approach a party. ahetepara una ﬁesta.

to approach, to get closer. ahetepara.

to cry loudly (a child, due to a strong reprimand, or exaggerating for a scolding or a simple refusal). miã huthei.

to cry loudly, to shout. huthe.

plant; Heliconia sp. (Musaceae). The new tender shoots are eaten.. yatitawe.

to remain for a good while under water. ohotao.

to limp. keyehewe.

to improve, to get better, to become good. totihita.

there is nothing left to harvest from the crop. hikari theka no oheprou.

to run out of food, to no longer have available food (from crops); to no longer have honey (from bees). oheprou.

I drove away the hekura with the smell of burnt meat (smoking). hekura ya pe yashua totihirei, yaro pe ni ishirini.

to smell of burnt meat. yashua.

to introduce by force. kiririkei.

to scratch. ka komãprou.

to be hungry. warahokoma.

to act in an interesting way to attract the attention of the opposite sex. huyamou.

Cook the yuca and give it to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to give food to someone. iyamarei.

small burujara bird, Dysithamnus mentalis (Thamnophilidae). otushirimi.

to brace oneself on one's feet (to make an effort). mamiki hitatao.

to become stiff, to become rigid. hitata.

to help someone, to help someone during work or combat; to accompany, to help a sick person, a child, an elderly person. payerimai.

there is no brave elder man (= you are not brave). a wãri waitheri periami yai.

elder, important man. periami.

she really could not fall asleep. a mio shihihirio yaioma.

not being able to fall asleep, having a restless night. hihirio.

to make kill someone by means of the hekura (enemy shamans). wekekao.

"They are your own burned bones. kahe ke wa ishipe. ", shouted the parrot. werehi a wãri ta no kutarureshini (mit.

ritual of consuming the calcined bones of a deceased person mixed with a banana puree. paushi-mou.

they ran immediately to the garden to harvest chili peppers. hikari hami praki a hukai mi rereo re shoatariyonowei.

to harvest, to pick (fruits/vegetables). hukai.

we will make love. pemaki ta kuwemo.

to make love (said by a man). kuwemo.

the Waika that live there. fnini tihetiprou.

object long that is elsewhere, far away, in the interior of the lands; that can be cut into pieces. tihetipramou.

flower bud, type of flower, flowers of certain trees such as epena hi, momo hi, wapu kohi, etc.. hunaki.

he placed the fire on the rotten branch of an apia tree. apia ke hi horepi poko shatiope ha wake makekema.

branch, twig. shatiope.

when the earth was undermined, the trees inclined slowly. hiki hishiai kuaai ha kuikuni, hiki opisi wekeataroma.

they inclined slowly. wekeataroma.

I will not achieve it. the no topropimi.

to achieve, to accomplish. pimi.

It is the fierce and warlike companion of the hekura spirits. korihotoma.

supernatural wasp. korihotoma.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (to see his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokemai.

to cause peeling. hikekeamai.

to slowly extinguish, to go out little by little (a fire). wãnonou.

he is always saying funny or unusual things. wã heomi o wã heo mai.

to be always saying funny or unusual things. heomi.

term applied to the beaks of Celeus elegans, Celeus grammicus and Celeus torquatus (bird species). shuririami.

deform, become hard like leather, twist. totihii1.

that is boiling. the yoruu.

effervescent. yorupei.

to bend, to twist. paroko.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

these fruits are excellent. e ki wai ta toprar e.

to feel joy, satisfaction or happiness; to be content; to be pleasant or enjoyable. topra.

go quickly to see what that unknown noise is. ei yai ke the ã re kui, ei ke the ta mipraohe.

to check out something quickly. mipraohe.

when they killed Tiriri, in the place where he "cried" in the form of a guan, his white down turned into weyari, the "demons" of dawn and dusk. titiri a ha thariheni, paruri a miã ikipe hami, ihi ke horoi pe re weyariprariyonowei.

demon of the night. Tiriri.

we have taken an abandoned path that passes by the river. hei ke yo tusi re ithopokiri ha pemaki kuparekirio.

abandoned path. kuparekirio.

to have a changing voice (adolescent); to have a hoarse voice (from shouting too much or after participating in a ceremonial dialogue). wã peherã.

changing (voice). peherã.

short bamboo tip. manakorowe.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

to walk behind, to lag behind. korotou.

up there the capuchin monkey is resting (= you are not hunting). kiha wisha a wãri ma re wãshimi horupohori.

to catch one. wãshimi horu.

to have smelled bad. wãrirãyou.

they also killed paujíes for their wing feathers (lit. paruri imisi pe kãi niyama.

feathers, especially the long tail feathers used for adornment. ashirimi.

Farts always have a smell. shiã ke pe ni ukukuo si ihehewe.

to smell or sniff something once. ukukurei.

the jaguar was threatening. tototi pe pemoma.

to be threatening or menacing. tototi.

1. blister, swelling filled with pus or serous liquid; to be soft, flexible. 2. to make whirlpools (water). uhururupi.

to decorate with handprints. pãrishãpi.

tobacco irritates the mouth (it has been prepared with improper ashes). pee nahe naheri.

irritating substance. naheri.

it bit me suddenly. pe the ki waweheprakei kurei.

it bit me suddenly. waweheprakei.

I have offered a machete. sipara ya hipekema.

I have offered. hipekema.

to dawn. rohoroprou.

the piapocos perch when they pass over the top of Mount Kanae. kanae keki ora hami mayepiri pe pe ropraai hayuyou no thareshi (cha.

to have the habit of, to frequent. ropraai.

to occur suddenly very close (noise, voice). tisutou.

to speak of upriver. oto.

the thick chain vine broke. rasirasi thotho pata hetii re kuketayonowei.

it hastily painted some large, poorly made circles on its body. wãritiwe a oni pata roherohemoma.

a heavy rain is coming towards us. maa ke a hoã pata huimai.

big, large. kuketayonowei.

the ancestors became more and more numerous. porepore ke ki re parai totihionowei.

to spread, propagate; to intensify (pain). paraprou.

the Waika, down there, kill many cotingas. kihi waika a re perirati, ei a no eimipi re sheorati.

cotinga. eimipi.

send your mother there to harvest corn, where the branches are emerging downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to emerge, to protrude (of a long object from water). shoroko.

lie down here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

to lie down for a while in opposite directions (with heads at opposite ends). yotetou.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than (plural object). hawehemakei.

to be about to make one side higher than the other. wereheprai.

The kraya caterpillars eat its leaves. kraya nahi.

saladillo tree; Vochysia ferruginea (Vochysiaceae). kraya.

they organized a funerary banquet. e pouku re koamaiwehei.

they organized a funerary banquet. koamaiwehei.

¿dónde vives. weti ha pei ke wa peria kure.

¿dónde están los váquiros. weti hami ware ke ki kua.

where?. ¿dónde?.

soft, tender, flexible. heyau.

to have heard, to have listened (to someone's death). yimika tarayou.

to have heard, to have listened. tarayou.

I know what it is. ya the tai.

to know, to be aware of. ihipi.

to appear, to form (light spot on the skin). wahipiprou.

son-in-law, hurry up, when the sun is still low, the bees become visible. shoape a ta haiaprarou, e naha the kuo tehe pei re naki wawetoai.

to clear a dense area, to cut vegetation to clear an area. wawetoamai.

to come to be placed at the end for a moment. hiitou.

to exhale, to feel. patheai.

1. To have come off completely (skin of a smoked fish) 2. To have goosebumps. proprokowe.

it has turned white (locally, in a precise place). the aukema.

only one spot has burned. the ishikema.

in a precise place, or a locally circumscribed activity (that does not affect the entirety of the object in question). aukema.

he moved away quickly, he moved rapidly. rurayoherii.

to prepare a substance (curare, a condiment) by leaching, pouring boiling water over a layer of a powdered product. kami.

descended vertically (perfective, plural object). wahohorariyo.

object in fabrication, object. yãnoestado.

to swell (the belly). hihatho.

to become small (referring to a cotton ball whose thread has been partially used). ãkroãi.

the stream is narrow. u makosi.

the people upriver use such narrow loincloths that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

narrow, tight. makosi.

to carry a heavy load. patetou.

the fire caught immediately and some embers scattered on the ground as they fell. wake pamento sin.

to scatter, to spread out. ensanprarirou.

to fold. yorekeai.

1. small pieces of wood arranged parallel on a wet floor to isolate it and be able to light a fire. 2. to crisscross logs or pieces of wood to sit on (and isolate from the ground). paritha.

(he/she/it) runs. rerei.

to run. erei.

recently initiated shaman. thamamo.

to become partially visible (after having been hidden behind something). waehai.

I am the one who has deflowered her. kamiyeni ya ka hiweherema.

I have deflowered her. hiweherema.

to lay eggs. ukosiprou.

I make a ring with the vine. thoo ya thotho motoreprai.

to form a circle, a ring; to coil. motoremai.

to become disheveled or unkempt. popohoray.

to improve (health state). kuyeherayou.

to be blunt (a spearhead). wahotowe.

I have already whistled in the ceremonial dialogue manner. horoimorayou.

I have itching on the lip. ya kasiki shihitikema.

I have itching on the lip. shihitikema.

por más que tú pienses "yo tengo un viejo fusil remendado con un alambre". hei kopetaye ya wãri ãrãprepi ta thaporani.

wire. thaporani.

I'm going to cut the hammock in two. ya thoku pahetiprai.

they cut bushes into pieces that they used as levers to remove. hii ke hi ha pahetirariheni, the mo pata hirurama (mit.

to harvest in this way to give as a gift. pahetikei.

to harvest honey by breaking the hive into pieces. fpuu poprai.

to harvest honey (by striking to open the hive). fpuu tuyei.

to harvest honey by breaking the hive into pieces (by striking from above). fpuu.

to be floating. potaprawe.

they cut bushes into pieces that they used as levers to displace the huge penis. hii ke hi ha pahetirariheni, the mo pata hirurama.

they cut into pieces (e.g. bushes used as levers to move a huge penis). pahetirariheni.

to be a little black, to tend towards gray. ishihi.

the Yãnomãmi will never leave off blowing dangerous substances. yãnomãmi the pe horayou onoope kunomai.

renounce, leave off. onoo.

Father-in-law, I caught a piranha and salted (the water to cook it). shoape, poo ke ya koshi yokerema, ya koshi sayuprarema (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

I salted (the water to cook it). sayuprarema.

as they wanted to take possession of his wife, they killed him. kama pe suwepi ke a he niya ha ruamaheni, a sheremahe.

I took the gallineta (bird) from a hawk (that had killed it). koikoimi iha hãshimo ya he rumakema.

to take possession of (a man. rumakema.

the ashes of the cremation site were crushed. ar de que las cenizas del lugar de la incineración estaban trituradas.

ashes. ar.

the young Yanomami men will not have the courage to approach (the dwelling of the enemies). yãnomãmi ihirutawe the ikuo totihio mai ke the.

young man, adolescent, youth (jokingly). ihirutawe.

they live there, quite beyond the country inhabited by the Waika. peritayoa.

He is carrying a load. i una carga pashokai.

to carry a load. pashokai.

I got burned in a fire, that's how I got fat. kai wake ha ya ha yaponi, ya pata prerayou kurei (mit.

got fat, developed (plural subject). prerariyo.

to prick (once) with a pointed object the meat being boiled, to facilitate the release of blood. there.

Baba could not contain (the laughter) any longer, he spat out the beautiful fire. iwariwe ke a puhi reprou ha maparuni, kai ke wake pata riyehewe hoprarema.

I spat it out. ya the hoprarema.

to spit, to regurgitate. hoprarema.

I'm going to kill the agouti by introducing smoke into its den. opo ya yareprai.

when they find a giant agouti, they will suffocate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

to suffocate an animal by introducing smoke into its den. yareprai.

to reach a medium size; to go from a large size to a medium size, to reduce in that way. prowehou.

(he) wanted to see if there were seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open or slit an animal longitudinally along the abdomen. eririprai.

the cat of mottled snout. mishi husho re hayapishiwei.

spotted, mottled. hayapishi.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

you will make me fall into the water. ya kepariyoma.

fell into the water. kepariyoma.

do not persist in going. a kuaai he yatiotihe.

do not persist in going. yatiotihe.

to surround someone, to surround a dwelling. hãyopei.

to darken (terminative). ruweprou.

I am in need, I don't even have a pot. pei ke ya horimou kukei, toutamiye ke si kua ma re mai.

pot. toutamiye.

to be about to cover one. horoipramou.

For the central Yanomami, it is the set of communities that live in the Parima Sierra towards the sources of the puutha ke u (lit.: Honey River). In that region there is an evangelical mission. For a long time the Parahiri were at war with certain communities belonging to the central Yanomami, for example the Maiyo theri.. Parahiri.

conserve something inside a package. hãropou.

Baba was short, he was of low stature. heweriwe hokatawe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi, yahatotowe ke a wãri kuo no kupereshi.

to be short, to be of low stature. atoto.

to become less concentrated, less thick. reherou.

upriver speech. misikiri hena.

upriver speech. misikiri.

in such a way that its end is completely flat and smooth, as the large beetles of the simitori species do when gnawing on tree branches. de manera tal que su extremidad quede totalmente plana y lisa, como lo hacen los grandes coleópteros de la especie simitori cuando carcomen las ramas de un árbol.

to cut/carve in such a way that the end is completely flat and smooth, as large beetles of the simitori species do when gnawing on tree branches. simitori.

to soften/make soft several objects. fepehama.

Noise produced by. tootoomou.

I am afraid. kreema natoshi.

to be afraid. kreema.

deform, let become deformed (through negligence). prithothoamai.

the cotton is soft. puhi mratamrata.

to be soft. mratamrata.

to be riddled with holes or punctures. ereshãrayou.

crouch over there, I crouch over here. miha ke a ta yereiku, kiha kamiye ke ya yereo.

to crouch, to curl up, to carry something in bent arms against the chest. yereai.

to attach feathers to an arrow. shereka he haopei.

the man was lying in his hammock attaching feathers to arrows. yãnomãmi shereka a he haomai kãi peritioma.

to attach feathers to an arrow. haopei.

she ran changing slope. the rereai mohe hoteaherima.

she ran changing slope. hoteaherima.

he immobilized her by encircling her with his arms around the waist. pei re shithema ha imiki re hãyokokeiwei.

the path is on the side of the mountain. hehu a shithema hami yo kua.

waist, abdomen. herã.

to toss an object in the air and catch it with the hand, to play by tossing an inflated bladder in the air and hitting it with the hand to prevent it from falling. mãii: lanzar al aire un objeto y recuperarlo con la mano, jugar entre varios a lanzar al aire una vejiga inﬂada y repetirla cada vez con la mano para evitar que caiga al suelo.

toss in the air and catch. mãii.

river of the tapirs. shamata.

hoko siki. hoko siki. It looks very similar to the prosi siki snake, but it is longer than it. Se parece mucho a la serpiente prosi siki, pero es más larga que ella.

snake (unidentified). hoko siki.

to kneel. mahekoku hitheiai.

to kneel. mahekoku hithei.

brother of the ãmoã tree. ãmoãmi.

fishhook. ãsuero.

we want (both) them to pass us, that's why we stop. yahe pe niya re hayuamakiriowei, yaheki uprapekirio.

we want them to pass us. uprapekirio.

female equivalent of puriwatoriwe. puriwayoma.

father-in-law, he wants to come here to skin us both. shoape, pehereki si niya re ikekeaimi ye.

to skin us both. ikekeaimi.

they captured them, but they escaped anyway (speaking of the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

they escaped. huwemaiwehei.

the arrendajos of white back possessed, in other times, the pijiguaos of the clearer variety. mope herasi re auwei mopeni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe (mit.

a variety of pijiguaos less red than the others. mopeni.

they grabbed her by the arm and forced her to get going. hurayomahe.

to have the habit of moving in pairs. kororotou.

to present one. hãihi.

to partially fold or roll up the edge of an object once. wapurekei.

to deepen the interior of an object, to make a cavity deeper. koehãmai.

objeto que puede ser. watiki.

he gathered them quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to pile up, to gather together. poshoshou.

there, over there and also it can be The word 'oka' in Yanomami means 'to cut'. oka kuo tehe.

there. oka.

the woman that one and the other married was splendid (polyandric alliance). suwe ke a noshi hari tepiama.

Dormilona was splendid (with her attire). wathaperariwe a noshi harirao totihioma.

splendid. tepiama.

to become ardent, to start sweating. heyoshiprou.

supernatural cannibalistic beings that live in this region (the sky). hetu misiri, hetu misiriwe: seres sobrenaturales caníbales que viven en esta región (el cielo).

supernatural cannibalistic beings. hetu misiri.

termite (unidentified (animal, plant).); edible. ãotot.

during the wayamou, to take over the initiative from someone else, to take the initiative in turn. wã koãmai.

yãri natha shrub. yãri natha hi.

small one, don't bend your legs (keep them spread and straight, as a novice should during an initiation). shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai.

to sit or squat with legs spread and bent, to be in that position. preprekekei.

I cannot walk fast when the pain in my thigh becomes more intense. naha ya wakusi hayeheri poruporumou ha ya ropaaimi.

intermittent pain, pain that becomes more intense at times. poruporumou.

tu boca apesta. wa kahiki ni hithãri.

se bañaron para puriﬁcar su cuerpo que apestaba. ke kipi ni hithãri pakokai kuaai re shoatariyowei (mit.

to stink, to smell bad. hithãrii.

como los que caminaban a la cabeza cambiaron otra vez de dirección, ãkroto nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction. akeheai.

return on one. yapapraai.

I descended the slope. ya mi weteherima.

to slide down an inclined plane. weterayou.

to cover, to block. kanera.

The branches hold the roof leaves. Hiyehiye pe masiko shiki.

branches or bushes placed on a roof to hold the leaves in place. hiyehiye.

to be locally damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekehou.

1. To align, 2. To tighten (aligning well) the straw strands of a basket. shanini.

I will tell (the Spider-monkey spirit) to project its hairs on the path of the y a w a r i (to dissuade them from coming). yawari ya pe mãyo he horoaiwe (cha.

Spider spirits. Espíritus-araña.

embrace/hug the tree with your feet. hii ke hi ha mamiki ta waporoiku.

to embrace, to hug. poroa.

to become longer than. frapahaai.

closing the eye halfway. mamo shukukuai.

to close the eye halfway. shukuku.

to flatten the surface of a piece of wood by striking it obliquely. pahayeai.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. shutukahe.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to launch this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to prepare a small bamboo arrow (with which to launch a malefic substance). haitaray.

the people of the red partridges in turn rubbed the dye on with their fingers, and also painted the edges of their eyes and feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

to clean oneself by rubbing carelessly. hãhitou.

he kicked him in the belly, and he fell. a kayeritou mi paa re korãyouwei, a sherema.

to kick. kayeritou.

it is certain that there is no muddy ground. h e ãhãtu prare ke the.

those are muddy grounds, do not approach them. heãrohe a ma re nos movedizos, no se acerquen.

hurry to hang your hammock under your husband's. heãrohe ke iha a ta pepia ta haiiku: apresúrate a colgar tu chinchorro debajo del de tu esposo.

muddy ground in which one sinks. terre1.

to become light, to be lightened. erehe.

(lightning). mi yãmirã.

lightning. yãmirã.

the cord of his hammock was about to break. pei pera the peki thapi fetii puﬁo yaro.

cord, rope. fetii.

the chigüires invited the butterflies. i pe shoamahe.

invited. shoamahe.

you young ones, go there to hunt for me. ihiru pe, miha yaroye ke a ta thahe.

go there to hunt. yaroye.

(root word). kana.

although the hekura goes towards you, if it does not intend to go where human beings live, it will turn its head away. y ãnomãmi the nape huu maopehe ha, ihi re a huimama ma kui, a mi re yaithatariyowei.

to turn one. yaithatou.

shamanism. chamanismo.

to hit someone with the fist during a ritual fight. pariki shei.

morichalera fish; Myleus schomburgkii (Characidae). palometa.

changed direction (perfective). akehetamarei.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, do not bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to rub, to slide along, to make an object fall out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikãi.

I am happy. yoiyoi henaki.

to be happy. yoiyoi.

closing the eye halfway. mamo shukukuai.

to close the eye halfway. shukuku.

to hang low, to tie with a long rope. preyukai.

to go with others in a canoe. tikerayou.

the disease demons weaken me (lit. shawara kini yare waikai.

he lay down after having finished cutting wood. koã ãsho pe ha waikani a perikema.

to kill, to finish off a living being; to complete a task. waikamai.

my older brother comes towards me and lies down in my hammock made with lianas. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

hammock made with lianas. perikeyoruu.

I will go there to live apart and open a conuco. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e thoothoomokiriowe.

I will go there to live apart and open a conuco (clearing for cultivation). thoothoomokiriowe.

term. aprou.

to do it for oneself (to break in that way). wahathorei.

insect. forã hesi.

he lowered the sun (myth). motoka a yahatotomakema (mit.

he lowered the sun. yahatotomakema.

frog (unidentified animal or plant). The upriver people (or a theri) eat it.. piripirimi.

to shake vigorously an object held with the fingertips to remove something from it (especially to remove excess ash from tobacco leaves when preparing a wad). yimisirarei.

come to get us. wamare ta koreyo.

they began to detest us. wamare nohi wãrirema.

us. wamare.

it was because the woman was a scatterbrain that Teremi eviscerated her and also it can be The word 'wãisipi' in Yanomami means 'in'. suwe ke the mohoti kuteani teremini the re kakaprareiwei (mit. It is a Particle. ).

to be a scatterbrain. wãisipi.

they have made me angry, I will carry out blood vengeance (lit. ware ha hushuamaheni, yaro ke ya niya shei.

to provoke someone. hushuamai.

I feel hot (lit: the heat comes out of me). ya yopri hai.

the turtle's legs emerged (from the shell). poshotomi pe mamiki wai harariyoma.

to pass, to enter, to exit. hai.

black light. ishi puhi ehepi.

light, pale. ikihi.

trees (plural). ãsihiki.

to become dull. wahotoai.

to lift or pry something up using a long pointed object as a lever. iyorerei.

Wake up and make arrowheads (to go to war). wa rii ha rãrini ãhi teshi ta thapa.

(name). ãhi.

once he was in the tree he placed his stick across the branches, then tied his arrows (so they would not fall). isi hami a kuo tehe himo ke a so pririparema, shereka ke ki okãi piyeoma.

across. priri.

the turtle quickly passed (from the ground where it was) to the footbridge (to cross the stream). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass, to move. piye.

to have had a vertigo. mi pe shiwãrihirayou.

to regularly have vertigos. mi pe shiwãrihiwe.

1. to have a vertigo, a dizziness 2. to lose all point of reference, to get confused, to not recognize oneself. shiwãrihi.

I am the one who will shoot it. kamiyeni ya niyaprai ta totihio.

I responded immediately to their shots, they were heard groaning. ya pe niyaprai nokarayoma, pe rããmorãy o ma.

to shoot an arrow, to fire a shot. niyaprai.

to be very angry. ãsiãsirimi.

extend, stretch out a finger. fi mihena kashesheai.

extend, stretch out a finger. kashesheai.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall seriously ill. parohou.

when you see the enemy warriors you will feel stunned with terror. wayu wa pe taprai tehe wa ãmoku keprariyo.

feeling of horror, of terror; to be stunned. keaai.

to divide, to split into parts in order to take one part. shetekerei.

today I have killed a feline. hei tehe ira ya niyai kuprei.

indicates a recent past. prei.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to crush or destroy by kicking (a semi-spherical object). katikikei.

became cold. preyurapirayou.

he opened his hammock (hung it) and lay down. yii keki a ha kusherini a perioma.

he is lying in a cotton hammock. yii ke ki ha a peria kure.

cotton hammock. yii.

that which can be. yatikamou.

to be in a state of constant movement. tirotiromo.

to tell someone to wait, to tell someone to do something later. waihamou.

to carry a splendid attire; to be very beautiful. noshi hari.

Give some fish to my younger brother, whom we asked to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

to accompany (someone). topehe.

he is afraid to speak to you. kahe ke iha a kahiki kuyeoma.

to have one. kuyeoma.

wait a moment, I'm going to put the honey aside. waiha pei ke ya u pe shiroprai kupe.

classify; separate, to put together objects of the same class. shiroprai.

he quickly untied the firewood and lit the leaves. kai ke wake ha kushetarini henaki wake piyemak e m a.

to untie quickly. kushetai.

to walk backwards for a moment, to retreat a little. tirurutou.

that is inclined towards the ground. the mi wetea.

to be naturally directed towards the ground, to be twisted (towards the ground). mi wetewe.

to be inclined towards the ground, to be slanted. wetea.

to have slit partially and emptied multiple objects. ekokorarei.

head. mi nono.

they fled one after another. the pe rereokema.

they fled one after another. rereokema.

to roll up a rope or thread letting it fall slowly while exerting a circular motion on it. yoririamai.

to scrape with the teeth the pulp of a fruit (to eat it). ãheheãi.

he slept a long time ago. yetu ha a mikeherima.

he slept a long time ago. mikeherima.

a short time. momención.

only some splinters spread out on the ground. nikashi ke the ki wai prarirou kuaai peoma.

to become extensive, to spread out. prautas.

I have the habit of wrapping a thick vine (around my ankles) because they generally wear out quickly (when climbing or descending a palm tree). prowehewe ke ya thotho pe motorewe thapou tharei, the pe kãi waruhou si ihehewe.

to crumble, to pulverize (earth). waruhai.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

I say frankly what I think. yãomi.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

to bend, curve, twist. horeprou.

Õmawe perforated the ground (above the water) with the tip of his bow, and it sounded like: "krosho. omawe hãto nahini u hiwehama: "krosho. krosho. krosho. ". ".

sound produced by a pointed object penetrating a material. krosho.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

to follow, to walk behind. nohãã.

to place oneself for a while in a hammock hung below another, to sleep several nights in a row in a hammock placed below another (e.g. during a move). pehithetou.

to drip continuously. poyopoyomou.

wait a moment, first I'm going to defecate. waiha, ya shi keyei pario.

to urinate. niaasi keyei.

to defecate, to lay eggs, to urinate, to fart. keyei.

when I kill a peccary, I carry it whole like that. kamiyeni ware ya pe pata ha niyaprani, ya pe pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

to carry a whole animal with its legs hanging down. tirorotamai.

it is necessary that you cut the pijiguao palm. rasha wa si ha tuyereni.

father-in-law, you must enlarge the hole. shoape wa the ka ha premarini.

denotes necessity or obligation (deontic modality); can be translated as the verbs . tuyereni.

one of them suddenly saw him and then all fixed their gaze on him. ai the mamo re keprakeiwei, the pe mamo pruka re shatiprakeiwei.

to suddenly see, discover, catch sight of. keprakeiwei.

they slept (during the night). pe mio he haruma.

Oso hormiguero se dejó ir y se durmió. teperiwe ke a puhi wãri ha mrataruni, a mikema.

to sleep, to lie down. mioma.

I put a lid on the pot. hapoka ya si ka he kahuai.

He slowly took off the big stone he had hanging around his neck, and plugged the hole with it. maa ke ma pata opi hayuu ha kuparuni, a ka kahua shoakema.

to close, obstruct, plug an opening. kahua.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with yellowish vertical lines. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with yellowish vertical lines. Shãshãripiwei.

los jóvenes cavando el suelo (con un cuchillo, con un machete). mapeni yorehi si tuyei ayaoma.

machete. mapeni.

he grabbed a liana, with which he folded the small tree, which ended up leaning against the big tree. thoo thotho a ha yãkãreni hii ke hi itutua ahetea ha totihikini.

to put two objects in contact by inclining or folding them. itutuai.

bird, Barred Antshrike; Cymbilaimus lineatus (Thamnophilidae). shoapeepeemi.

accompany him/her. a ta yauiki.

accompany him/her. yauiki.

they got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

to get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people), to detach and fall one after another (fruits). weyoyou.

wild plant of the nightshade family. shãã.

wild plant of the nightshade family. shãã.

habitually blows a cool breeze (in the morning, before dawn). fwahari a phouo tharei.

habitually blows a cool breeze. fwahari.

to coil or curl up in a spiral manner. akreterayou.

to be filled up to the brim. iyekea.

I went to get firewood (and threw myself on a fire), that's how I became corpulent. ya thariki ha tharoni, ya prerayou kurei (mit.

firewood. tharoni.

Siroromi skinned the man who was whimpering in vain from pain. siroromi yãnomãmi a yoai re shoapariyowei, a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

to whimper, cry out in pain. yomo.

fruit becomes ripe. fru- shototo.

fruit. fru-.

container that contains seeds. paheãrohe.

that. que.

hay racimos de plátanos en el conuco. pe shi toa re kuonowei peni oreyetu pe yarorowe ha tararini.

racimos de plátanos o cambures. oreyetu.

medicine. korukoru.

the Waika live there and make hammocks. wele ti ipa a ta prapari.

hammock. wele.

the base of a flat basket. yorehi si kohomo.

base of a container or basket. kothe.

"Father-in-law. shoape. Father-in-law. shoape. " he shouted. e komima.

father-in-law. shoape.

they advanced towards me with their gaze fixed on the ground looking for my footprints. pe the mi teateapraroimai kuperei, yare mãyo taeihe ha.

to incline or bend down to examine the ground. tekei.

to singe a bird; to burn the fur of an animal before butchering and cooking it. mi fukukuai.

to singe, burn off feathers/fur before cooking. fukuku.

that shaman shamathari really has the power to initiate, it is he who has transformed me into a shaman, he has made me a shaman. shamathari the hekurani, pei a norãmi yai hekuraprai ha totihioni, ihini pei ke ware shi yai wãriã totihimarei kurei (cha.

to become a shaman, to be initiated as a shaman. hekuraprou.

tree; Anacardium giganteum (Anacardiaceae). witowito.

to have perforated/pierced multiple times. hiroshorarei.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have thrown anything at you, they would have limited themselves to shooting you with poisoned darts (with a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to launch malefic substances by blowing through a blowgun. prothomou.

suwepiye: first person possessive, my wife. suwepiye: primera persona del posesivo, mi esposa.

my wife. suwepiye.

they lit a big fire to illuminate Titiri. pe wake pata piyeamai ha kuparuheni, titiri ke a hisikai ha kuparuheni (mit.

to illuminate something (with a flame, glowing embers, or a torch). hisikai.

take only for yourselves. kahe wamakini ke ki wetii ta makokahe.

take. makini.

to take a portion of hunted meat (or fish) for oneself, detaching it in this way. tapan.

to stir up water with the feet to make things on the bottom rise to the surface, to search for moriche fruits that have fallen into the water in this way. kapuyã.

The baby's navel is still attached. Amo yemota pe wake.

navel, belly button. yemota.

Rabipelado se levantó del chinchorro y se dirigió hacia las dos mujeres que lloraban al muerto. suwe re ke kipi puhi re hãkihihou hami nãro a hoketou re shoarayouwei.

dead. hãkihihou.

cubierto de neblina. hukosi.

neblina. hukok.

mother-in-law, however my brother-in-law ate all the wapu fruits (while you suppose that they are not ripe yet). yape, shoriweni wapu ke ki nohi waa waikireiwei.

we were still far from the river when my brother-in-law went to fetch water. parawa ke u owetao tehe, shoriweni mãu u hikei hurayoma.

however, nevertheless, but. shoriweni.

don't shout, so that your voice doesn't wake up my anger, I already told you to stay calm (lit. wã rahumotihe, pei wa wãni ware hushuo ka thaa tikoruhe, ya wã wasia waikirei ke a kurei.

to get angry while speaking, to start shouting. rahutou.

to have a wider opening than the main body. hãshãshãwe.

tomaré bienes solamente una. mori totihiwe ke ya yuape, ya nakou kotãope mai.

one; singular. yuape.

as the body (of Woodpecker) had begun to swell, the platform on which it was exposed swelled. a ha shuwerini hii hiki noshi hariraama.

platform on which a dead body is exposed before cremation. shuwerini.

he covered his mouth with white down feathers, and also his chest. pe kahiki horoimama, pe pariki kãi horoimama.

to cover something or someone with white down feathers. horoimai.

to be standing with one foot a little ahead of the other, and the hand on. kaihio.

he fished not with a real steel hook, but with one made from a cachicamo bone. yuri a kããma ihea ke a yaini mai, moro ke iheapi yaini.

hook, fishhook. kããma.

they always put on a bad face. pe the pe puﬁ wãri hore tikrohai si ihehewe.

he gets angry for no reason. a hushuo si ihehewe.

it seems. ihehewe.

to have gotten dirty locally. shamikei.

to produce pots (durative 2). turerou.

to fabricate something short on purpose. onohoprai.

la gallineta se voló y los aparecidos huyeron (al cielo). hãshimori a ha yepraruni no porepi pe rurupeherima.

huyeron (al cielo). rurupeherima.

to be greedy (lit. fhoperiwe imiki re humipe.

porcupine. fhoperiwe.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

to disappear behind or under something, to hide behind something. shãhoãi.

¡Attention, their voices sink under the ground. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

to disappear suddenly in the middle of something, to be swallowed up; to remain for a moment under water, to sink for a moment to the bottom of a large hammock. ohoprou.

since you have wives, lie in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yakapraoni.

the souls were searching for the gallineta. porepore peni hãshimo a taemahe.

hurry up to look for them while it's still daylight. pe taei ta haiohe, pe the haruo ke tehe.

to search, to look for. taema.

to divert the rain. hãimãi.

I untangled the bow (caught in the vegetation). hãto re ya nahi hayurema.

bow. hãto.

plants that. hishihishi.

when he finished resting, he began to walk again. the shipenapi yaruo ha haikitaaruni.

to finish, to complete. yaruo.

to construct, elaborate a dense or thick object, to wrap food with a thick layer of leaves before cooking it on the embers, to build a dense defensive palisade. sutaprai.

to clarify a path, to look for the way. katitipramai.

to become clear, limpid, translucent (terminative form). herushiprou.

disheveled. porukuwe.

disheveled, unkempt. porukuwe.

to suck it. wasusuai.

to suck, to ingest by suction. wasusu.

the ground is cleared (it was cleaned, raked). pitha a roshi.

cook peeled plantains in water for me. kurathaye ke ki roshi ta tupa.

to be partially deprived of its surface layer. roshiã.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to keep, conserve something at a distance from the dwelling. hewemapou.

to fall asleep when night falls. fmio henapraoherii.

to fall asleep at nightfall. henapraoherii.

I am really tired. ya motawe totihiwe.

to be tired, to be fatigued. motare.

to become less and less visible in the darkness (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). waroshorayou.

Baba tenía costumbre de ir a cocer los paquetes de orugas a la selva. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

to make cocer (cook). ripiprai.

they two will do it. kama ke kipini the thapipe.

they will do it. thapipe.

past tense marker indicating a past event more than one day ago. -roi.

yo estaba convencido de que una serpiente me iba a picar y caminaba con aprensión. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to feel anxiety, apprehension; to be jealous. harurei.

they realized that Cucarachero did not have fun. osheanariwe a iriamou mrai a re tapareiwehei.

he/she/it did not have fun. tapareiwehei.

to peel or remove the skin/shell of a fruit by shaking or sudden movement. eharayou.

to crumble, to collapse. hashishai.

call, summon. naka.

to give away. para regalar.

we went hunting for a prolonged period farther away (than usual). he piye hami yamaki heniyomoma.

we went hunting for a prolonged period farther away (than usual). heniyomoma.

to make dry; to protect from rain. wehetimamai.

they (the two) took her, placed themselves on each side and carried her slowly to solid ground. opi a kãi re washiripikeiwei.

they (the two) took her, placed themselves on each side and carried her slowly to solid ground. washiripikeiwei.

he will simply keep the flashlight without batteries by his side in the hammock. rintena the pata shiroko yakapou poope.

to be empty (flashlight without batteries); to return empty-handed (from hunting or fishing). rintena.

to have a beard. fkaweiki weuhuwe.

beard. kaweiki.

to perceive a distant noise. hiriãrei.

to paint circles on one's body, to have painted circles on one's body. oni rohahao.

to paint circles on one. rohahao.

you must light a fire in the central plaza. wa wake ha paramapani.

to light a fire, to kindle it. paramarei.

(upriver speech). fapokawe shiﬁ.

upriver speech. fapokawe.

the (cut off) woman's head accompanied the husband rolling. pe heãropi ke ihami pei ke the he pruruu nosi yauai yaioma.

to follow, accompany someone in a movement. yaurei.

mountain people. ora*.

as for water, we will not lack it. pemaki rii yapekeope, mãu ke upe ha.

to have what is needed, to be independent. yapekeo.

to make a cylindrical or round object roll. yapuramai.

to make thin, not thick. fepisi.

the path extended all around the Sipara rock. sipara keki mathakari pata yashokamai kuaai yaioma.

to walk through the forest (termination). yashokoprou.

mantener apretado o trancado entre dos objetos. wãkipou.

they (two) placed cotinga skins in the lobe of their ears, and slid parrot tail feathers under their armbands, they looked really magnificent. heimi ke pe ha huupiararini, kurikaya ke teshina pe ha makekeararini, riyehewe totihiwe ke kipi kuoma.

they placed (feathers of the cotinga bird). makekeararini.

to touch, to manipulate a patient during a healing (shaman) and also it can be The word 'pakihou' in Yanomami means 'to accompany a person by staying very close to them'. fimikipakihou.

dreams and memories will not let him be accompanied (lit. thapithapi ke ki pakihou kuyeheo mai ke the.

to touch, to manipulate a patient during a healing (shaman). pakihou.

Gather the leaves, we will scatter them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, to spread (durative, plural object). patherimai.

extend one or the. poshokoai.

arena. mramraka.

that they change my mental faculties. ya puhi aithaa ta toithipe.

my mental faculties. toithipe.

to pry a tooth (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetikei.

to widen progressively towards the edge (in a conical or bell shape). eheteai.

her mother-in-law broke long thin sticks for the roof of the shelter. yãã henaki kãi ha tirirarini: su suegra humapi ha moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

roof. hamapoma.

the cassava is easy to grate (lit. nashi kokoku te pe hir ik ãmou epehewe.

behavior of a material when it is rubbed, grated, scraped, or rubbed. hirikãmou.

the path is branched. yo rãikiwe.

to be branched, to run through several separate beds. rãikiwe.

to hang upside down, like a sloth or a spider from its web. haharamayethawe.

stand over there. heyeha a ta kuiku.

(the dog) was over there when it fell silent. heyeha ke pe matha waitou totihirayou kuroi.

over there (at a certain distance from the speaker, upriver). feyeha.

do not cease to visit me. ware he warou mraotihe.

he never comes to visit me. yare he warou tao ma mai.

the dog has been several days without going hunting, make him kill a tapir. shama ke a ta shemahe, hiima ke a prao he weyaprou ma re korohe.

to visit someone; to spend the night somewhere; to remain in a situation for several days. weya.

they will shoot several arrows at you. wa kãi taitaimai kukeihe.

they will shoot arrows at you. kukeihe.

everywhere people are currently in scarcity. hei tehe pe the pe oheo totihiomopotayou.

everywhere people are in scarcity/famine. totihiomopotayou.

to be happy. poyoitawe.

dye of the hekura, when they paint their bodies with it they resemble the crimson fruitcrows. kuhararomi nouku.

crimson fruitcrow. kuhararomi.

we are clogging the house. yãno yama ka komããi.

to belch, to clog. ka komããmãi.

I take a little rooster. kakara ke ya ihirupi teai.

I take. kakara.

to buzz. terere.

Mujer-picure paró bruscamente (de correr) en las fuentes del río Kootopiwei. kootopiwei u heki ha thomiriyoma ke a hothoprakekirioma.

Name of a river. Kootopiwei.

to boast, to make oneself interesting in front of men, trying to arouse their interest. mokomou.

to assign a limit, to put an end to an extension. kohomakei.

to become smooth and moist. frakahaprou.

don't stay at home, you will take strength (it is what is advised to young people to make them go to the forest to find food or to hunt). yahi ha kuo mai ke, wa rohotheri.

to take strength (said to young people to encourage them to go to the forest to find food or hunt). rohotheri.

Cachicamo ate all the honey. moroni puu u pe waa hititirema (mit.

Cachicamo. moroni.

to have milk (woman). suhemoprou.

shall I leave you the leftovers. ahe ya shee ta hepei.

leftovers. hepei?.

to be under the effect of a hallucinogen. shami-shami.

lay down the child. ihiru a ta perimaki.

they laid him down dead. no prewe a ha perimakiheni.

to lay down, to make lie down. perimaki.

to have a red and very painful eye (due to the reasons mentioned earlier). kamakaripiprou.

in the place where the body of my dead relative is exposed, an unknown and terrifying voice was heard. wato re nahi, yai the kipi ã no re kimuy ripiyei e.

dead woman. kimuy.

to be a bad shooter with a bow, to be a bad hunter. tehe.

to be a bad shooter, to be a bad hunter. tehe.

to obstruct a place. paimimarei.

to feel quite well (physically or mentally); to rejoice. totihitatou.

to make vomit. kamishi yoru.

to vomit. yoru-.

I will go upriver and come back to eat nai flowers. ora hami ke ya ha kuraherini, nai ke ya wai koope.

I will go upriver and come back to eat nai flowers. kuraherini.

the fire went down the cliff. pei maki pata wake nihorãi ha kuparuni.

to slide down something, to precipitate down a slope, to fall rolling. nihoroprou.

to have vibrated, to have experienced small shakes; to have swayed. tirikirariyoma.

to have been cut a portion (of a round object). thakaroa.

he does not cease to ruminate his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

to get angry, to lose one. hushuo.

to be silent. matha waiwe.

to be silent. waiwe.

when Yoawe saw the woman he turned into a rock gallito to capture her. yoaweni suwe a taprai tehe, a niya ha huweani, a hore ehoãmi unaprou shoaoma.

to capture, seize, grab (a single object). yoaweni.

t h e r i y o m a: female member of a community. t h e r i y o m a: miembro femenino de una comunidad.

hoã tokurayoma: it seems a woman from Maheñito ran away. hoã tokurayoma: parece que una mujer de Maheñito se fugó.

woman. theriyoma.

the people upriver use such narrow loinclothes that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

not be completely full, plurality of places where people went before dying, be located on both sides of. roprawe.

Small clay pot. Pequeña vasija de barro.

Small clay pot. humohoru.

the earth is crumbling. mashitha a hishiai.

it was no use putting stones (to plug the holes), the water undermined the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

to be undermined, to be eroded. hishii.

your teeth are so big (that I'm afraid). wa naki pata kuyehewemi (mit.

said of an object that is in such a state that it induces one to give up on it. kuyehemi.

then you have to place several logs on top. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

to lie on top of one another, to be sick and lie on one object then another. makekou.

they invited the son of the old woman to participate in a ceremonial dialogue (to make their request). suwe pata pe ihirupi ke a himomai kupariyomahe.

to invite someone to participate in a ceremonial dialogue. teshomomo.

to gather, to group together. iriki.

he wears a necklace around his neck. tope ki harepou.

collar, necklace. harepou.

we eat kohere fruits mixed with water. osotros comemos frutos kohere mezclados con agua.

mixed. mezclados.

later you will realize the consequences of your action. waiha wa no wai shihiroprarowe.

to put oneself in a situation that will have dire consequences. hiroprarou.

to have fun during. nohi iriãmoãi.

to have fun. iriãmo.

the tábanos have the sucking beak flattened. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tataha.

fyo ithoa: path that crosses a watercourse. fyo ithoa: camino que atraviesa un curso de agua.

path. camino.

to grow (a human being, an animal). yawe.

¿qué voz terrible es esa. no kiria, perf.

to shout, to yell. yaweremo.

the ancestor joined the others to go to the party. poreri the iriamou mi hua nareroni.

to go somewhere with a specific purpose. nareroni.

to have the thighs separated, to separate them. yorao.

Where is my part of the loincloth. weti ipa napeyoma ke a. Did you tear yours into two strips (to offer me one). wa siki sheririprarihawe.

to tear or cut into several strips. sheririrei.

he carried two plucked paujíes one against the other, he gave them to the woman. paruri e kipi roshi ha parekereni, suwe ke iha e kipi hipekema.

to remove the outer layer (of multiple objects). roshimai.

he told his two sons to get into the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemaparema.

to tell someone to get into a canoe. tikemaparema.

to be cluttered (a place); to be in disorder; to be piled up (people). hishikiãi.

deep water. uoki.

to be locally flat. semakehea.

null. kuatomi.

to resurrect, to come back to life. hori.

not having strength in the arms (lit: having the arm light). poko herehewe.

light, not heavy. herehewe.

to make clear, limpid, translucent (durative, plural object). herushimai.

to start looking with crossed eyes. mamo repoo.

to look with crossed eyes. repo.

to make war. na wa.

bird; Tachyphonus sp. (Thraupidae). kuimiyo.

father-in-law, what is in the basket that you hung over the fire. shoape, mihi weti pei wa the pe thari yaumaparei kuhe.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

to hang something, to suspend something. ape.

to have combed one. yakekerei.

spirit associated with the tamandua (anteater). shokoriwe.

to kill (lit. fyimikaki wetiai (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : to bite in the ear) (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue. ).

to cut with teeth, to attack, to kill. waheti.

despite everything I managed to finish the roof. yaa ya si oa yãshimarema.

to do/achieve something despite difficulties. yãshimarema.

bejuco; Tynnanthus polyanthus (Bignoniaceae). hayahaya.

he cut two pieces of wood. the hi kipi tihetiprarema.

cut two pieces of wood. tihetiprarema.

Men make the women of their rivals sterile using manaka plant. Hombres manakapiamarei mujeres de sus rivales con manaka ke ki.

to make a woman sterile. manakapiamai.

(speech from upriver). ﬁya.

to have shaken persistently (an object planted in the ground). hãwekerayou.

newly burned field before planting. hãrãrema.

our relations in the past were friendly and I do not stop thinking that they still are. yaheki rimimayou parioma, yaheki nohimayou tao ya puhi kuuwei ke the.

to be friends, to have good relations with someone habitually. rimimou.

(speech from upriver). shiokorema.

they live there. pe hiraaharayoa.

they live there, in the forest. hiraaharayoa.

to become rough, rough; to smoke, to become rigid and dry by means of heat (fire, sun). ropakei.

when we had left behind the morichal, we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to ambush again. korãriyo.

Carpintero enano se hinchó y la plataforma (sobre la cual estaba colocado el cadánosiyeriwe) se distendió. cadánosiyeriwe a ha shuwerini, hii hiki noshi hariraama.

something beautiful that has spread out or unfolded (e.g. the night). cadánosiyeriwe.

I took out the ocumos (from the boiling water), and put them in a basket. ohina ya mo pe ha hikeprarini shote he ha ya moku pakema.

to put something at a distance, to leave something behind. pakema.

to tie a capuchin monkey's tail around one's head. t si yohoai.

to tie a capuchin monkey. yohoaprai.

the stars do not twinkle. shitikari pe mamoku pata royokoprawe.

not twinkling. royokoprawe.

to separate the toes with the hand. mamiki kakatai.

to tear incompletely, to tear at the edge. kakaai.

the river is rising. u petii.

the river is at its highest level (or: it is full of water). u petiwe.

to be full, to be satiated; to be at the highest level (of a watercourse). petiri.

the cassava plants fell off, detaching from the root. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

to fall off, detaching from the root. poruprou.

to become smooth and moist (durative 2). frakahou.

ripe plantain honey (a plantain compote mixed with the ashes of a deceased person). tate puu.

to ripen (only for plantains and peach palms). tatei.

hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei: the children climbed the trees (with rings placed around their ankles). hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei: los niños se trepaban a los árboles (con argollas colocadas alrededor de los tobillos).

eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit. ): in turn, Woodpecker climbed right away. ): a su vez, Pájaro carpintero trepó enseguida.

1. to climb; 2. to roll (a round object); 3. to steal, take away (several objects). torere.

to have been painted by someone. tipikamokei.

the father of Kaw (personal name) informed us (lit. kaw. : is the person to whom the mouth of Kaw calls father). kahiki re hiimouweini yamareki yimirama.

the person whom someone calls father. hiimouweini.

Arco superciliar, ceja. weomahiki.

when he had eaten all the bones produced by the cremation, Espíritu-luna crawled along in a crouching position. oshohore ke ki hititiarei yaro, periporiwe ke a pata hãmorimou ha shoaparuni.

all of them climbed, all ascended with difficulty. komi the pe tuoma, komi the pe hãmorimoherima.

to crawl, drag oneself along the ground, climb with difficulty. hãmorimorayou.

to lean against an elongated object for a moment. hirikit.

tree. kohiki.

what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me. kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by pulling with the hand, exerting lateral pressure). hoyorarei.

to install one. pepimou.

he went when he had finished speaking. e kuu tehe a koã ha koruherini.

he went when he had finished speaking. koruherini.

it is on the ground, on the shore. parau kasi hami the praa kupoi.

(epistemic modality). -poi.

to install one. pehithemokei.

to have the forehead painted with a curved line that goes from one ear to the other. tiwaroprawe.

burn vegetation to clear land for planting. ishinomou.

The termites have eaten the wood. Ipe huu kori a wakeprawe.

termites, aggressive ant species. ipe.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

to have the neck extended. katiaprarou.

the interior became very spacious. the hushomi pata yaweteprou ha totihironi.

to become spacious, to expand (a cavity, a hole, the interior of an object). yaweteai.

he broke his arm by striking it with a stick. naprushini kama poko yahekirema.

out of anger I broke the end of the arrow by striking it. ya ha hushuoni shereka ya yahekikema.

broke (something elongated) by striking it. yahekirema.

that is the reason why I do not want to die. yaro kahiki re keonowei the yãno pe si ahi nikerei.

I do not want. keonowei.

the carrying strap stretches downward. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to stretch downward (durative aspect). prayukou.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually (said in the south of the Orinoco). yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

to fall asleep gradually, to spend the night in the forest during a journey. mikeherii.

I don. mikimikipi.

companion, helper. pariki*.

to be dark, to have a dark complexion. pitiripi.

I will become blind. ya hupepirayou.

I became blind. hupepirayou.

I am dizzy. rororomi kona.

to be dizzy. rororomi.

some mature men came (or went) to visit. prowehe the pe hamamoma.

some mature men came to visit. hamamoma.

to become shorter, to become inferior (in height, length, duration, value); to stay behind, to stay short of a limit. haweai.

to be habitually prohibited around something. ãyotamarei.

he peeled the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to start removing the outer layer. roshiprai.

onoto tree; Bixa orellana (Bixaceae). nana shihi.

this has the same smell as onoto seeds. hawe nana shi monoku ni kuwe.

onoto (a reddish-brown dye made from the seeds of the achiote tree). nãrã.

to spit out of disgust. fkahu upe sirimou.

to spit out of disgust. sirimou.

we dispersed through the forest (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was shaking where the others were passing. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

move, shake at the base by a living being that is moving. ushu.

to approach, to get close. pesheku.

designates the chácharos during a ceremonial dialogue (lit. fhei ke ki re hirikoyahi.

designates the chácharos (a type of bird) during a ceremonial dialogue (lit.: those that rub themselves with colorant). hirikoyahi.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (moving objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to find something by moving objects around. heaponi.

he is beautiful (or: she is beautiful). a koshãpi.

beautiful. koshãpi.

to perforate (synonym). tirosho.

although he said he wouldn't do it, he stubbornly pulled out his teeth. maa a ma kuu tehe, naki hoyoa he yatikema (mit.

to insist on doing something despite being told not to, to do something stubbornly or reluctantly. hoyoa.

and this rock oscillated (between their hands). pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma.

oscillate. keaprarou.

1. A species of large scorpion (unidentified animal or plant). 2. A character in mythology, representing an excellent archer, good hunter and good warrior. Uhutima reached the Moon with his arrow just as it was about to escape behind the clouds. The blood of the Moon spread over the earth giving birth to warriors.. Uhutima.

to fry, roast, toast multiple objects. hãrikirarei.

are you all painted and adorned. haiprou maki paushimoã ta haikirihawe.

to be adorned, painted. haiprou.

to twist, to coil around something. kare.

I dropped the machete. sipara ya huherema.

to drop something in a specific place. huhekei.

if you kill me, you will have a fierce demon spirit in your chest because of me. kamiyeni ke yare niyaprarema wa pariki no ãiãmopi uprapariyo.

to be possessed by the spirit of a fierce demon and become ferocious like it. ãiãmopi.

if it rains you have to place yourself in the center of your group. maa a kei ha mi ãmo ha re wa re romapareiwehei.

you have to place yourself in the center of your group. romapareiwehei.

the cavity of the tree quickly became narrower. hi ka wãkikou ha kuikuni.

to become narrower (hollow, cavity). wãkikou.

it is he who has thrown it away. ihini a hoyarema.

that one. ihini.

don't hurry to go back. koo haiotihe.

don. haiotihe.

to become slippery (inside of an object) (perfective). takrarayou.

bird; Tachyphonus sp. (Thraupidae). kuimiyo.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass. wererou.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it. tikukupei.

botanical family name. iaceae.

the girl who had her first period, and who was isolated behind the menstrual hut leaves, came out without anyone noticing. yipi re henaki hishomi ha ai re a suwe re yipimouwei, a haa hãthorema.

menstrual hut. hishomi.

demons of disease. fomaweri.

to have been dug not very deeply. maketia.

woman who becomes sterile due to shapo. shapopiprou.

we will make love. pemaki ta kuwemo.

to make love (said by a man). kuwemo.

¿quién se encuentra al pie del monte Morãmana que se alza allá. hei morãmana ki wãri re uprayahi, ihi ke ki kothe ha, weti ke a wãri roa.

a place name (likely a mountain). Morãmana.

because of Bachaco, his mother-in-law got lost and metamorphosed. koyeriwe pe yesi a ha yakemarini a shiwãrihipramarema.

because of that, the path was lost and could not be found again. the naiki he hore tiraprou ha maoni, naiki yakeamai ha shoataruni.

to get lost, to lose one. yake.

I will mash the seje fruits and dilute the pulp in water. hoko ya mau yaruai.

Brother-in-law, here they purify you (with a liquid). pei ke, shori, wa yaruu ke a kupohei.

to clean the inside of an object, to mash fruit in water. yaruai.

to cut to take for oneself. pakarorei.

dawn came gradually and they claimed goods (= proceeded to trade). the mi ha harutaaruni, matohi pe ã pou henaomahe.

dawn gradually. harutaaruni.

saltarín, poseedor de mostacillas, cruza un collar alrededor de mi pecho, yo me engalanaré ante aquélla que, allá abajo, tiene hendido el extremo de un poste de su casa. kihi a no topepi re niyaope, weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, kihi totahi re sheteterati ke ki iha, ya ki kãi ta huyamou ta yaio.

to be cracked, to be separated (end of a long object). shetetamai.

we slowly raised our necks to see. opisi ke yamaki oraki yarehou.

to raise. alzar.

ambos continuaban sacudiéndole las ramas desprovistas de frutos. proke e the hiki ha ripukuatarani.

sacudiéndole las ramas desprovistas de frutos. ripukuatarani.

more. más.

the celestial beings that put the smoke of the rainbow around their necks. hetu ke misi pe pata wake shi omãyãri re harehei.

celestial beings. hetu.

but, don't you warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise. yimika.

to bend strongly, to fold to the breaking point (extreme of an object); to arch, to bend strongly under the weight of a load. pehuai.

to drag, to pull, to haul, to drag something in a fall. pakakurei.

to grab by the shoulders, to hold by the shoulders. hãkihio.

they were already far away when he arrived at the house (camp). pe wãri payekou ke tehe yahi hami a kopema.

to move away, to separate, to put at an adequate distance. payekou.

(example sentence). pei ke the naka hami hi ke the no toromou.

penetrate into the vagina (an object, inadvertently, as happens for example when women walk in the water). toromou.

(synonym for rasike). yere.

they did not know the plantains and they only ate earth. kuratha pe tai mahei, ei a pitha shiro wai no kupereshini (mit.

they did not know. kupereshini.

they discovered the path to the village. shama ke a pata kopehewe praa re tarareiwehei (mit.

to discover. tarareiwehei.

to be afraid. ãkãthãmiki.

to be the only one who falls ill. mohothamou.

variety of peach palm whose fruits turn reddish when ripe. yoararomi.

confront each other only with sticks, do not tie knives to the tips. pe ta wapayo, hii ke hi shironi, sipara wama si hiihãi mai.

let's fight with sticks (the two of us). peheki ta wapayo.

to confront, to fight with sticks or clubs. wapayo.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their extremities damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

had its extremity damaged. thekeheokei.

don't suspect me (= don't believe that about me). yare nohi thapotihe.

to suspect, to believe, to think something about someone. toanowehei.

suwe moko: pubescent woman, woman of childbearing age. suwe moko: mujer púber, mujer en edad de procrear.

pubescent woman, woman of childbearing age. suwe moko.

to deeply cut someone. yakaroprai.

the Waika dragged smoke into Yotenama's den to asphyxiate him. waika ke pe yotenama pe re yareiwehei.

to be dragged by the wind or an air displacement. yarekei.

to have tobacco preserved by piling leaves on top of each other and making balls to keep them dry. ithorip.

you (pl. wamaki kunomi.

to say, to think. kunomi.

to have moved along the ridge. matotorayou.

I was moving hesitantly. kekou kuaaherima.

to stagger, to hesitate (once). weuhu.

the gallineta (bird) diverts the gaze of the apparitions. hãshimoni no porepi pe mamo re yakehamarati (mit.

to divert someone. hãshimoni.

to be dry and hard. yihitiãi.

visitors revive the pain by trampling the ground. the pe nini kashuuhe.

to be talkative (lit: to have a talkative pain). wã kashuu.

pain that amplifies, a significant message that visitors are about to arrive (they trample the ground and thus revive the pain). kashuu.

the leaves of the wakata tree cry like spider monkeys. wakata henaki re pashomorãkiri.

to imitate the behavior of the spider monkey. thayo.

take one out for me to try. tahiapi ke a ta hukepa, ya the ta wapa.

to take out, to remove. hukepa.

to dedicate oneself all the time to sorcery. riyaya.

to have a relationship of son-in-law or daughter-in-law to a mother-in-law. yesimou.

to feel disappointment (after a refusal). peprou.

there the Yanomami position themselves on both sides of the herd of white-lipped peccaries and shoot arrows at them. kihami ware ke ki ha yãnoãmi the ki hore shekiamou yakaroai mapei ha.

to be straddled, to be located on both sides, to be overflowed on both sides, to straddle, to sit astride, to pass from one side to the other of something. yakaroai.

to come loose; to detach. hayo.

many arrow cane stems were intermingled. shereka pe re yãﬁrimoperei.

crossed in all directions, intermingled. yãﬁri.

to dry; to dry up, to evaporate. weheti.

to lower a little (the water level). fu manaheheãi.

to lower a little (the water level). manaheheãi.

venomous stingray; Potamotrygon spp. (Potamotrygonidae). yãmãro.

the thunder roars in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to be always arguing. frãrãrãmotayou.

to start piling up, to start gathering. poshoshoprai.

1. Picramnia macrostachya (tree), 2. Edible caterpillar with two violet-gray bands on its back resembling the color from the leaves of the Picramnia macrostachya tree. kãshipinãyoma.

los antepasados eran grandes chamanes y resucitaban. the pe re hekuramonowei, the pe re horipronowei.

resucitaban. horipronowei.

(voice) to resonate. wã tihekirayou.

to rebound, to not penetrate, to slide against a hard object. tihekirayou.

to tremble, to shiver, to shudder. yatiyatimou.

the bananas are planted (too) close together. kuratha siki tia no shatitiwe.

to plant tightly, to plant close together. kothethe.

come children, stand in the central plaza. ihiru pe, pe ta hehãtaru, pei hapohe.

to stand in the central plaza. hehãtou.

dawn is breaking. mi ukekeai.

to dawn, to break (of day). ukeke.

to shorten (by losing one of its parts, breaking). pusutuprou.

chewing tobacco (prepared tobacco, ready to chew). fpee nahe ashi (habla del sur del Orinoco.

chewing tobacco (prepared tobacco, ready to chew). fpee.

(after having been moving slowly) he started to run quickly. hayariwe ke poko siki hoã ha hairápido.

to execute a task quickly. hairápido.

He defended himself (speaking). Nakre wã no huo.

to defend oneself (speaking). wã no hu.

slowly Danta passed (from the tree where it was perched) to a yagrumo tree. kahu ke usi ha shama ke a pata opi re piyekeiwei (mit.

to pass (without descending) from one tree to another. piyekei.

he inclined towards the ground to listen (the subject is in a tree). the yimika wãri ha tapraikuni, the mi wãri ha tepraikuni.

to incline towards the ground. yehe.

chick, fledgling. harukupiai.

(lament funerary) (speech of upriver). alowe ke.

lament, funerary lament. alowe.

to set apart a gourd in which the crushed bones of a male relative are found, in order to consume its contents. fãhuku kushai.

the small baskets became beautiful when they were separated. morã pe re kui pe pe kushai tehe riyehewe e pe kua shoarayoma.

to separate, to set apart. kushai.

indicates a more or less distant past, but which is always situated within the course of the day. ku-roi.

Rabipelado was crushed under the boulder and the macaw people rolled over his shattered remains on the ground to paint themselves. nãroriwe pei ke makini a nahihoma, a nahihiwe yapikope hami arari pe tihirumoma.

crushed, shattered, crumbled, crumbled. nahihiwe.

I don. yarapiami.

to form a stain. patiprou.

others, stiff from death, began to float slowly on the water. ai nomawe ke the pe kasheshewe opi pokeai kuaama.

he made a rigid and straight woven tail with it. kasheshewe yorehi si tuyeprai shoarayoma, a teshina thakema.

to be completely rigid, stiff or straight; to be rigid (a corpse). kasheshewe.

to be quiet, to remain silent. hirotou.

Jaguar cayó (ruidosamente), y el pájaro minero (creyendo que era el trueno) se puso a cantar. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

pájaro minero; Lipaugus vociferans (Tyrannidae). atawa.

my. ia.

to cause multiple things to swell or inflate (perfective, causative, plural object). thorohomararei.

to address someone using this kinship term, to have a mother-in-law to daughter-in-law relationship with someone. yuhamou.

The Yanomami exist. Yãnomãmi ohi.

to be, to exist. ohi.

to have lifted something using a long pointed object as a lever. iyorerarei.

the two children immediately plunged into the rapids. pora a hami ihiru ke kipi nihoroã shoapariyoma.

to slide down, to slip down, to plunge into water. nihoroã.

he destroyed the loins of all the children. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

he destroyed them all. haikirarema.

to speak. mi were.

the ashes were not at all recent. pi no kirii.

the weave of the mapire is too tight. the siki wai yorehi sheniniwe no kirii.

not at all. no kirii.

to be very hungry. keekee.

to be angry. takakarimi.

to leave leftovers. sheeamai.

middle, center. mi thari.

middle, center. mi thari.

another name given to Thunder. watawatariwe.

short. fokãtãmi.

to loosen (a knot). prohoho.

to widen (a cavity), to enlarge (a surface). hauhuamai.

serpiente, sapa, mapanare (falsa). Xenodon.

to bite partially dry food, not being covered with water anymore (at a site). watetearei.

Siroromi is tall and his skin is light, he stopped upon arriving. siroromi re a wai prushishiwe yarehewe, a upratareheroma.

he/she/it stopped upon arriving. upratareheroma.

to tear or cut a strip at the edge or incompletely. sheririkei.

estar completamente blando. krããhãwe.

to fragment a bone into several pieces by splitting it with a knife or machete, for making arrowheads (perfective, plural object). tikarorarei.

as it rained a lot I was wet and chilled. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

was wet and chilled. totihioimani.

animal that can be. yoamou.

He placed a vine on the ground to start the game. Ai kareretamakei.

to place a vine on the ground in order to provoke a confrontation between two sides, in a game that consists of pulling the vine to drag the opponent out of their field. ai.

to avoid an arrow or projectile by arching to the side. tutakaprou.

to be angry. yotata.

shoot arrows at the fish, they will hide. yuri ke ki si ta tiheherari, pe ki rukeprou ke a kure.

to shoot small palm wood arrows (repeatedly or over a duration). tiheherarei.

they danced one after the other and, when they finished, night fell. the pe ha praitaaruni, the pe ha prairini the mi titiray o m a.

we will go towards you dancing (the hekura say to the novice who is being initiated). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye (cha.

to perform the presentation dance during a festival that brings together a community (or several); the guests dance first and then the hosts follow. prairini.

he was afraid. a kirirariyoma.

they shot their bamboo-tipped arrows (myth). the pe hiyoka si hetitia waikirariyouwei (mit.

perfective aspect. -riyo.

a small snake bit me. oru ke kini yare si wetirarema.

it bit me (referring to a snake bite). wetirarema.

to be very hungry. potipotimi.

Hija mía, apresúrate a ir a darle de comer a tu esposo (ubicado enfrente). oãsimi heãrohe nii e ki wai hipea ta haikuhuru.

hijo mío, arma tu arco (tú eres quien va a disparar). oãsi, kaheni re the ta iyoku.

my younger sister, my daughter, etc. (female). oãsimi.

hammock that has one end higher than the other. nonohowe.

arrow shorter than normal. torohe.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yaiopereshi.

to return on one. yapatao.

they killed peccaries and gave the broth of the stew to drink (= they killed peccaries and organized a funeral banquet). ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

to produce a dry sound by moving the jaws (referring to the peccary). hunenemo.

to execute blood vengeance, to kill someone to avenge a death (lit. fshereka maka siki hãniprai.

to cut in two, to split in half, into two equal pieces. hãniprai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). tãrãimi.

to draw two lines, to scratch twice (longitudinally). shetitiprai.

to get close (perfective factitive). prakemakei.

Move in a line (and silently), like the peas. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

1. To line up, align. 2. To tighten (by aligning well) the straw strands of a basket. shaniniã.

bamboo. hirorai.

to place oneself in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. tharipei.

a type of plant or animal taxonomy. sururuayemi.

to wrinkle the forehead (perfective). riikikei.

the wind rose up and the branches fell. watori re a hokeprou re kutheiwei, hii ke hi poko prariroma.

to rise up, to get up. kutheiwei.

one is still missing. ai a no shoawe.

axes are very expensive. hãyokoma pe no pruka.

the. no.

to acquire a more or less circular hollowed shape (cylindrical object). epehepra1.

to have been divided into many parts (a round object). hakaroma no.

(related word, no clear translation provided). mamiki horoko.

they came to see (monitor) this path. hei re yo wãri miãkeyorumahe.

they came to see (monitor) this path. miãkeyorumahe.

to become loose, to become untied. ohororoprou.

to those paujíes with red crests perched there, they want to skin their crests. hei mãruki re roore, ihi hesikaki niya ha yoaheni.

crest and neck skin of a bird (paují). mãru.

the forest smelled good. fnini tiweheo hi a ni kreterioma.

to smell good, to perfume. kreterioma.

while the parrot was perched, while it was at the end of its stick. werehi a ma roo tehe, a ma hiio tehe.

to perch a parrot or macaw on the end of a stick. hiiprai.

to follow someone in a line. yaupraai.

to lie on belly or already be lying on belly. rehoo.

the two women sat down slowly in Honey's hammock. yãmonãmãriwe kama ke e thoo ke thoku ha suwe ke kipi re tipeariyonowei.

they sat down slowly in the hammock. tipeariyonowei.

to shorten. onoho.

to become concave on the outside. wapokou.

to leave (by negligence) the meat to start rotting. kopiamai.

in this direction are my conuco and my house. kiha ke ya hikaripi praa kupiyeheri, ya shaponopi praa kure.

conuco. hikaripi.

to scratch, to rub against. hãriki.

there is blood in several places (of the forest). iyeiye re pe nohi hirawe kui.

blood. iyeiye.

I will claim the goods at the moment when the demons of dusk push my hand away (claims are not made during the night, at the time of the ceremonial speech, but in the morning, before leaving). weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hããihe tehe ya ta nako sho.

to extend the hand in front of oneself to prevent an evil being from approaching; to reject someone. hããihe.

(it) split, broke in two. siroromi a riyã rajarse, partirse en dos.

to split, crack, break at the edge due to a blow (spherical object). tihatho.

short, stocky, of short stature. hokatawe.

he has just entered the armadillo's burrow. opo pekapi ha a rukerihe.

he has just entered. rukerihe.

he/she has a cramp. t shi totatotawe.

to have a cramp. totatotawe.

he hid out of fear. kirikiri pe wayu ha a hitheoma.

to hide out of fear. hitheoma.

to be all present in a vikuaprani, weti ipa a totoa ta fenapa (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue. a wã rii fa tado t h a i k i a.

to kill someone (and thus cause the parents to cry). wã tetemapei, perf.

to be present. wã.

it coils as it falls, like a large fecal mass. hawe shii the pata yorirou.

to fall in a coiled or spiral manner. yorirou.

little one, do not bend your legs (keep them spread and straight, as a novice should during an initiation). shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai (cha.

to sit or squat with legs spread and bent, to be in that position. preprekeo.

to finish shedding skin (snake) or bark (tree). ukukuprou.

in the place where we could not pass (due to an obstacle). pemaki shi ta wãrioprei ha.

the place where we could not pass (due to an obstacle). wãrioprei.

el perro ha estado varios días sin ir de cacería, haz que mate una danta. shama ke a ta shemahe, hiima ke a prao he weyaprou ma re korohe.

danta (tapir). korohe.

I will not wait to tell others to hit you with a bow stave (used as a spear), that is what I say. yetu hãto ke ya nahi pata kroshomotamarei ha, ei naha ya hoã kuu tao.

to tell others to hit you with a bow stave (used as a spear). kroshomotamarei.

on the other side (of the hill) the Toprai river is located. hei ãyoripiyei ha toprai ke u kua kupiyei.

is located. ãyoripiyei.

the rain erased the animal tracks. maani yaro pe mãyo pakokai.

to purify oneself, to disappear, to dissolve (under the action of water). pakokai.

to decide to accompany someone, to start accompanying someone. yauprou.

I am hot. Ya wakehe.

to be hot, to have heat. wakehe.

he placed the fire on the rotten branch of an a p i a tree. pi poko shatiope ha wake makekema (mit.

to rot. horepiai.

I don't stop having itches. the pe shihiti puhi reamoimi.

to not give up. puhi reamo.

I let go of the child. ihiru ya hayoai.

to detach, to loosen, to pull out. hayoo.

he started blowing (a malefic substance) at him. darhorashiprai.

to start blowing (a malefic substance). darhorashiprai.

they threw the case that contained the feathers to adorn themselves and transformed it into a guan bird, then dawn came to the dwelling. karaha si ha sheyerini, si ha mãrãshipramariheni, pe he harua shoapema.

to throw or toss something. sheyerini.

to give, to offer; to entrust an object to someone. hipe.

the day soon returned to how it was before. yetu ha the mi uhehetou mi yaparayoma.

to rise again (the day). uhehetou.

it's raining. maa ke a ahetoimai.

it. ahetoimai.

many paujíes took flight. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

they flew away, took flight. yeprariyoma.

oscillate, be animated. akeakemo.

I'm going to kill the agouti by introducing smoke into its den. opo ya yareprai.

when they find a giant agouti, they will suffocate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

to suffocate an animal by introducing smoke into its den. yareprai.

the man was moving without ceasing to vigorously squeeze Siroromi. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

the man was moving without ceasing to vigorously squeeze Siroromi. ãkikiãpraroma.

to become a little greasy, to have a little fat after having been thin (and often, sick). shãrokoprou.

the tortoise passed quickly (from the ground where it was) to the footbridge (to cross the stream). ihirãki ke ki ha totori pe re piyetaa yaikeiwei (mit.

to pass or move quickly from one support to another. piyetakei.

(to fall). kei (caer).

(to run). rerei (correr).

to do something repeatedly, to pluralize an action. mai.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to crush, to grind, to soften with the hand (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). hushikikei.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko.

movement. manashi.

they felt then a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to worry about someone. haruhai.

It is said that girls have their first period at the same time as these squirrels. Kario wayapashi.

small black squirrel; Sciurus granatensis (Sciuridae). kario.

the palms of pijiguao do not have fruits (= they have not flowered). rasha si pe furoko.

tibia. furoko.

to be dizzy. yoriyorimo.

in absoluto eran recientes las cenizas. yupu the ushi pe no wãi weyahamipi no kirii.

intensifier. weyahamipi.

Zoological term, bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). Zool. It builds its nest in tree hollows, its honey is slightly sour. , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta).

bee (unidentified species). makiopi.

lagoon that forms. thookoro.

let's cross the river there to take the old path. mihi re u ha pemaki ha pekatuikuni, ihi re yo tusi hami pemaki kuparekirio.

old path/trail (path that is starting to close, path invaded by vegetation). pekatuikuni.

to bruise in one place. wãokor.

he was afraid. ya ma-rariyo.

they already have all their noses broken. the pe hiyoka si hetitia waikirariyouwei.

perfective aspect. -raru.

if their expedition is successful, that is if they kill someone, they undergo the unokaimou ritual. unokaimou.

ritual. unokaimou.

to offer food (to many people in succession). hipemokei.

it's all stained with dirt, leave it to dry in the sun. the pe pata tepepishi, wa the fueki ha auprarini.

dirty, stained (with dirt, smoke, etc.). tepepishi.

to have a hole. tiroshoa.

extender las alas por un momento. hehehetou.

the strong smell of the watota brew impregnates the cotton hammocks and you name it (= you recognize it) without a doubt. watota ke u nakini yii ke ki ni watota re ke ki rukerayou ha, epena re a wayu ha wa the si poprai katitia re shoarayouwei.

malefic, feathery; seems like a blanket; wraps and suffocates men. watota.

it is far. the prahawe.

to be far away, distant. prahaa.

(related suffix). -ti-.

to begin to. hapresheprai.

he approached quickly to the place where the ashes of the cremated body were. oshohore ke ki no preope hami.

approached, came near. preope.

shaman. shamaori.

the attribute of the hekura (rihu u) was about to come to me, but since I was not staying still, it turned back. rihu uni ya nape mori ithou he yatiokirioma, kamiye ke ya he ha reshiproni a he tatokema.

to be restless, not stay still. reshiproni.

to cut or tear a narrow strip for oneself. makosirei.

qué mandón es ése. kurahe the wai ta nosiyemou piyeapraowe.

expresses astonishment. piyeapraowe.

ikiyari. ikiyari.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

compress, crush, press against the ground, keep an object in place by putting a weight on it or applying pressure with the hand. hiki.

wait, we will walk during the night. waiha, titi ha pemaki kuaaheripe.

we will walk. kuaaheripe.

the pava rajadora was at the top of the tree (and was not visible). mãrãshi a yaokokema.

to be at the top of a tree or branch across a dense space, and for this reason, not be visible from below. yaokoo.

to be transido (extremely cold). kohipirayou.

to sway, to swing back and forth (especially when carrying objects on the back). maikonami.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantity. yateheprou.

tree. kosihi.

without the others knowing it, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni (mit.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. hãthoãkini.

to lose strength for a moment. yautou.

to suck in (the flesh of a fish bone, the marrow of a bone, the juice of a sugar cane, etc.). ususuai.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, pulling the body and taking momentum from the lumbar region to rise up. pushukupushukumou.

to doze off, to nod off. thareheai.

they discovered us when we were surrounding the house. yama yãno he hãyomai tehe, yamareki tararemahe.

surround, encircle (multiple objects). hãyomai.

the noise of the eyelids of the ceremonial dialogue. poshe mamokasi heã.

eyelids. mamokasi.

in the center (of the web), where it is dense, the Spider-Spirit was curled up. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

to sleep deeply. fmio sutao.

1. to become dense, thick, thick (in the center of something) 2. to make dense, thick, thick. sutaai.

si (pei). kanapopi.

move away for a moment. a ta payeketaiku.

move away. payeketaiku.

numerous clusters of pijiguaos hung from the palms. yahatoto hami rasha pe nadejo (de participar en el diálogo ceremonial), noka pata ithãthãmoma.

it is said of the clusters of pijiguao fruits when they hang in large quantities from the trunk of the palm. avifithãthãmou.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something in the vicinity of a dwelling. hewemaparei.

wasp (unidentified animal/plant). karosha.

to open the eyes, to wake up. reitou.

to tense the string of a bow by twisting it on itself. petiamai.

no les amarren cuchillos en la punta. hii ke hi shironi.

cuchillos. shironi.

the tobacco pouch is hung on the stone axe handle. p ee nahe rukea kure.

to be hung, hooked. rukeai.

you always lie. kahe wa horemou no motai.

he pretended he was going to defecate. "waiha, ya shi keyei pario", a wãri horemou kutariyoma.

lie, deceive, pretend. fhore.

noise that arrows make. tãrãtãrã.

Horonami recogió el hacha de piedra y cortó a Cachicamo en dos. horonami poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema.

stone axe. pore*.

in a place where the ground was bulging, there were manaka palms. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha manaka si pe kuoma.

convex, bulging, rounded. yeprihi.

you yourself have become brave (lit. waitheri a no mãyo hami nosiyeriweni wa na.

to become brave/valiant. nosiyeriweni.

I am worried, there are not enough cooked plantains and there are only two small bunches left in the field. ya puhi ma re horihitou totihirohe, roshi the no wãi kuprou totihiopi mai, porakapi the kipi wai onohowe yaua kupiyekiri.

to be disconcerted, stunned; to be helpless. horihiprou.

we tensed our bows, but the white-lipped peccaries turned back. yama the iyopou, ware ke ki he pata tatorayoherii.

since Macagua was annoyed, they turned back. prereimariwe ke a hushuo the no wã ha, pe e he tatopariyoma.

retrace your steps. a he ta tatoru.

to turn back, to retrace one. tatorayoherii.

he broke off a branch loaded with fruits and let it fall. himoihimo ke ki ha keprarini a kemarema.

to break off, to detach. keprarini.

to hide an object behind another, to disguise, to conceal by interposing something. shãhoãi.

I thought suddenly. pensé yo de repente.

I thought suddenly. hãi.

(he) sat with legs spread apart. kumãrãroriweni irariwe ke yakorotou.

to sit with legs spread apart. kumãrãroriweni.

to make angry, to play tricks. hoashimou.

red hummingbird (unidentified). tohomamoriw.

he let his saliva drool, and then sucked it back up. kama kahu upe ukurayoma.

let drool saliva and then suck it back up before it falls. ukurayoma.

to stay for a long time with people from other communities. ohotio.

if you insist on going you will get yourself killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini wa shemoparu.

to kill oneself. mopariyo.

as I resent them, I did not cook pijiguaos for them. ya pe nohi ha wãriponi rasha ya pe harinomi.

to feel resentment towards someone. wãriponi.

(no clear translation). rohothe.

he remained in the tree until dawn and, being prudent, he checked that the tree was not trembling. ha re the tikrea he haruma, a ha moyaweoni the hi tiikou mima.

to tremble, vibrate, oscillate. tiikou.

to attract someone. sukusukumorayou.

(southern Orinoco dialect). etete.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

its. su.

to pretend something is dirty or impure. shamimou.

to bend or fold objects by inclining or folding them (southern Orinoco dialect). ututu.

to have a bulging torso, to have a prominent chest (offensive). pariki yeprihia.

send your mother to harvest corn where that tree whose top protrudes (in relation to the surrounding vegetation) is. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami e moku nape ta shimiki.

to have the protruding tip (in height). shorokorakiri.

¡se le parecía mucho. a no wãi hore shomipi ha ke.

different. shomipi.

he/she/it was not angry. a hushuonomi.

he/she/it was not angry. hushuonomi.

the pot has been placed in a twisted position (it is tilted or unstable). toutami si kayarea.

to twist, to coil, to wind. akare.

to receive many objects from the same person. prukapei.

as the Yawari woman confused me, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

a Yawari woman (supernatural aquatic people). yãwãriyoma.

to be about to have oneself painted with a curved line going from one ear to the other across the forehead. tiwaropramou.

to reduce a cassava bread by breaking it into pieces repeatedly to eat it. makosiamai.

to cut or tear into narrow strips (multiple objects). makosimai.

he immediately scraped the muscles of his neck, then those of his arms. pei re orahi the hami the hokekãi shoaoma, pei poko hami the pe kãi hokekãma.

to scrape, to remove the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting superficially, to clean the bottom of a pot by scraping. hokekerei.

walk in line (and silently), like beans. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to walk in a long line (silently). prihãã.

to hang (upriver dialect). fehã.

come quickly to tie it. eyeha a wãri okãprari ta hairoyo.

while the young men tie leaves (to represent the effigy of an enemy), go and stand (lit. huya peni henaki okãihe tehe, mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripaharuhe.

to tie, to bind. okããkei.

tonsure. he mãrokoshi.

to sit or squat for a while in the central plaza. rotapei.

Jaguar, hungry for meat, looked for it without finding it; the tapralarga (bamboo tube) to blow magical substances. ira a naikiripi taema ma kui, a tapralarga nomi.

a hollow plant stem with transverse partitions like bamboo, used by shamans to blow magical substances at adversaries. tapralarga.

on the other side Tilingo multibandeado enlarged in turn the cavity of the rock. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

to enlarge a cavity, a hole. yawetamai.

to start suffering muscle pains. hayeheriai.

with this thing one is comfortable, thanks to it it is possible to sleep in good conditions (referring to matches, which allow lighting a fire to keep warm during the night). ihi re the pe ha the pe topramapou, pe the pe mimapou totihio.

to make someone feel comfortable, to receive well; to accommodate a person properly, to provide a comfortable and pleasant situation. topramapou.

upriver (speaking of upriver). kai ãsho (habla de río arriba.

upriver. kai.

high bank of a watercourse, worked by the current and periodic crumbling of the earth. It is said that apparitions live in those places.. weyokosi.

to make deeper, to deepen (perfective aspect of the inchoative). koeherayou.

the earth collapsed and they all precipitated (down the ravine). mashitha a ha yohopraruni komi pe prururariyoma.

they precipitated. prururariyoma.

the hekura broke into a smile. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

to smile briefly, to break into a smile. watetou.

to cure a seriously ill person. kaihamai.

to imitate the cry of an animal to attract it; to call someone by whistling. hoshomi.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. hiropraroimi.

to be angry. kuhuru.

to have hunger, to be hungry. toticomer.

older brother, put this on your shoulder, lift it. ãi, ei ke the ta rukere, the ta yerere.

to hook, to hang in balance, to place on the shoulder or around the neck. rukeai.

her/his spouse. pe wãhãmapi.

her/his spouse. wãhãmapi.

a term used in upriver speech. fehu.

to have left too much water inside the tobacco when preparing a wad. uwemararei.

to bend, to twist, to deform. kohehe.

they will offer sweet potatoes. huko mo e pe hipemahe.

to offer. hipemahe.

to be next to each other, to have been placed next to each other. wariria.

the butterflies invited the chigüires to a party. kayufanariwe peni hurari pe shoamahe.

butterflies. kayufanariwe.

there, on the summit of the mountain I abandoned a deer. mihi, matotopiyei ha preãri ya prapei kuhe.

on the summit, on the ridge of a mountain. totopiyei.

in the moment when one suffers an attack. wã hutherei.

to suffer an attack. hutherei.

Give some fish to my younger brother, whom we asked to accompany us. oãsimi pema a re nokamapore, yuri a ha a ta topehe.

to accompany (someone). topehe.

we will walk during the night, since we have just recognized the path. titi ha ke pemaki kuaaheripe, yama yo ma re katitipramarihe.

to walk. pramare.

(he) cut (someone's hair) irregularly. he wãrekerei.

to cut someone. wãrekerei.

I scrape the shaft of the bow with a knife. sipara sini hãto ya nahi hirikai.

to scratch or scrape with the nails, usually to remove red spots caused by biting insects. tisik.

to limp, to hobble. tiherii.

they already have all their noses broken. the pe hiyoka si hetitia waikirariyouwei (mit.

they already have all their noses broken. waikirariyouwei.

por allí se reunen muchos váquiros. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

to have filled up to the brim; to have become numerous. manikirei.

we must forget and stop seeing each other, you stay where you are (= don't come to our house). y afeki mohoti hoyayou fa kuikuni, efa kafe a wãri roa ta fe iku.

to stop visiting each other. hoyayou.

to go gossiping. wãno hirimoray o u.

gossip. hirimoray.

throw away the empty chinchorros (of the hekura that have left), inhale hallucinogens, let the shamans trace a new path (for the hekura) and you will become heavy again (= the hekura will return to lodge in your body). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

to become heavy; to regain the hekura spirits and thus gain weight and power (a shaman). huteai.

¡Estamos cansados de escucharlos. wamaki ã wã hirimou wãri.

las pirañas le cortaban con los dientes los penes a los monos capuchinos en cuanto éstos se acoplaban. siparariwe ke peni hoashiri ke pe mo wari wetii nokamou ha kuparuni.

imité el canto de la gallineta, ésta respondió inmediatamente. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to happen immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. nokamou.

harpy eagles embody the 'double' (n o r e s h i) of a person who lives near them and also it can be The word 'noreshi' in Yanomami means 'soul, spirit double'. pías encarnan al 'doble' (n o r e s h i) de una persona que vive cerca de él.

shadow; the soul double of a person. noreshi (pei).

(related to eshi). noreshi.

we, we live there, downstream. kihi kamiye ke koro ha ke yamaki kua totihipekirio.

we live there, downstream. totihipekirio.

to go ahead in reco-. pomi.

the footprint of the váquiros is not very old (still a little fresh). ware pe mãyo weyahawe.

footprint/trail that is a little old. weyahawe.

strap or strip from the bark of the yãri natha shrub. yãri natha siki.

firefly, star. kurikayari.

to have become ill due to one or more shawara. shawaramou.

to have flabby, wrinkled buttocks. kohomopisi.

to be surrounded, to be surpassed on both sides. yakaro.

since you have wives, lie in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yakapraoni.

to squat and defecate one after the other (humans, animals). thopohopraai.

they did not tell anything to the person they had invited to accompany them. wãri ke the pe ã wayou mai, the re nikeremaponowehei iha.

to invite someone to accompany. nikeremaponowehei.

when we had left behind the morichal, we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to ambush again. korãriyo.

monkey. hoashiri.

to sleep in a hammock hung above another. makeprao.

I will give it to him/her. ya e hipeape.

to give (it/him/her). hipeape.

he protected the tobacco by putting stakes all around it. pee ya nahe hikorokema.

to surround with stakes driven into the ground. hikorãi.

to leave a fruit to become wrinkled (through negligence). wãpretemararei.

head. mi nono.

to deteriorate rapidly. wãritiaai.

hiervan raíces de yuca y dénle de comer. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

yuca (root). nashiki.

to pierce (repeatedly) with a pointed object the flesh being boiled, to facilitate the release of blood. erirai.

while Oso hormiguero was going around in circles, the woman went straight back home. shokou hoo tehe, poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriimaprou.

to be the first to go to a place. shodo.

there the váquiros (a type of bird) gather in large numbers. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

to fill up to the brim; to become numerous. manikiprou.

who inclined (the container) of my kashuhuri seeds. kashuhuriye wetini pe rii yotehemakei kuhe.

I waited for the paují to land (before shooting it with an arrow). paruri ya romakema.

to place or make something lean in a certain place. yotehemakei.

the rocky wall of Mount Yaapiwe is high. yaapiwe ki pata re tirerakiri ye (cha.

to be high, tall, elevated. hotaka.

gotas de sangre chorrearon por mucho tiempo del nido de abejas (de la especie o i). oi ke a pata iye presheshou ha kuparuni.

to flow out, to emanate. presheshai.

to remove a thorn using a pointed object [misiki washai, durative, plural object]. fmisiki washeai.

to remove a thorn using a pointed object. fmisiki.

this arrow with curare tip is good. kihi ai pei namo re hiire a kãi totihitawe.

tip, point, end. hiire.

suddenly I found myself completely under the effect of yopo (lit. hisiomi ani yare shea re totihirehe.

yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi.

the great rock leaned slowly. opi totihiwe maki pata wekeai re kuaaheriiwei.

the earth crumbled (around) the trees and they leaned slowly. hiki hishiai kuaai ha kuikuni, hiki opisi wekeataroma (mit.

1. To lean, bend; to oscillate. 2. To slide and fall (long supported object, especially arrows). wekeai.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

steadied. afianzó.

to be angry. kakeke.

strap or strip from the bark of the yãri natha shrub. yãri natha siki.

to be angry. kuhuru.

to open, to split (the end of a long object). shetetai.

to ask someone how to do something. hiramakei.

to be worried about someone's fate. puhi mi yapahawe.

to be worried about someone. yapahawe.

supernatural being associated with clay pots. oshoporithawe.

to be angry. koukoumi.

to be deep. ka praha.

to expand, enlarge, spread out (durative, plural object). presenmai.

edible caterpillar (unidentified (animal, plant)). It usually feeds on the leaves of the wayowayo natho vine.. wayowayo.

it was a short time before the turtle's (sick) head suddenly collapsed. poshotomi yetu ke the pe he wãri ha reipraikuni (mit.

to be hanging partially in the void; to be in balance, to be about to start hanging in the void (by sliding). reiprakei.

he went to meet him, steadied himself on his feet again, and struck him a blow (with a club). fue a su encuentro, se afianzó de nuevo sobre sus pies, y le asestó un golpe (de garrote).

club. garrote.

to clean or paint several objects white. aushirarei.

when you gathered the bones of the cremated dead, did you search carefully (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

to search carefully for scattered fragments mixed with other material. prorururei.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, gathering the body and taking momentum from the lumbar region to rise up. pusutupusutumou.

he took out his loose teeth and gave them to him. naki prore ha ukeraruni e the ki hipekema.

to loosen, to become loose. proromai.

a mosquito stung me. ukushini yare tikarema.

mosquito. ukushini.

he will reappear here. a petou kooyorupe.

to appear, become visible, manifest. wãwe.

after a long time they ran out of firewood, and then they felt cold. yãkumi totihiwe koã the ãsho pe ha hititiarariheni, pe wahaturayom a.

firewood. totihiwe.

the conucos are far away, downstream. theka praa korotaa kure.

to be far away, downstream. korotaa.

I'm really going to break their shoulder blades with the back of an axe. hãyokomani pemaki pootopi wãri yahekiprai ha totihironi.

shoulder blade. pootopi.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take tobacco from someone else. hakorei.

(he/she/it) falls. ke-i.

to fall. caer.

to crush partially something with the incisors (perfective aspect of the inceptive, plural object). washishiakei.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

made me stagger. atateapraramai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). he yahato.

to become less dense, to become more sparse, to thin out (low vegetation). takakai.

1. yohemi si.

Fragment of bamboo cane. yohemi.

lizard with bluish tail (unidentified animal). riprou.

to advance one behind the other. hirihi.

they have blown (a magical substance) at us. wãri horashikei ma re kuhahei.

to blow (a magical substance) at someone. horashikei.

put your head here. eyeha he ta tototariyo.

present the body to a shaman to be healed. tototariyo.

he carried plantains hung from a vine on his back. kuratha a rukeka no yehipoma.

plantains or bananas hung from a vine. rukeka no.

the wasp nest whose (tubular) opening is curved. kopina moroshi re payokoi.

curved, hooked, having the shape of a circumference arc, being completely curved. payokowe.

eye condition where a foreign object or dirt gets between the eye and eyelid. rashapi.

come eat váquiro meat, I have something to accompany it with. ware a ta iyayo, ya tehiapou.

to eat one food accompanying it with another, to eat meat with roasted or boiled green plantains, or with cassava bread. tehiai.

after my departure (on the occasion of your death), the fragments of your calcined bones will be thrown (out of the mortar where they will be crushed). wamaki ishi pe wãri akatahu yutuhou heowe.

thanks to the pore henaki the people upriver can spit magic plants. pore henaki wayu ha ora theri ke pe pehiki yutuhou kure.

fragment, piece, part. yutuhou.

(speech from upriver). ãshowã.

tooth that has been removed in that manner. yayetima.

the load strap is too short. natha yekehiwe.

too long load. yekehikei.

crushed, shattered, crumbled. nahihirayou.

the otter had curled up in a place where the high part of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to be curled up at the bottom of, to be huddled at the bottom of. hikokãi.

now that things are barely perceptible (in the dark), we will get lost, we say (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). pei inaha the wai waroshoo tehe pemaki yakeriheri, yamaki ha kuni.

to be barely perceptible in the dark. waroshoa.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense a bow (perfective, plural subject, plural object). iyoararei.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other. nonohãi.

he wanted to make known his name (and said): "they are nai flowers, nai flowers. pe the pe ãhã wawepramai puﬁo ke yaro: "nai ke pe, nai. ". ".

to make known the name of someone or something. wawepramai.

Rabipelado ya estaba lejos cuando pensó: "¡y si volara. nãroriwe a payeketao waikiwe tehe: "ya yea perayou. ". ", a puhi kuma (mit.

fly. perayou.

to fill up to the brim (termination form). hiekeprou.

to be happy, to be glad. hãohãomo.

guamo tree; Inga sp. (Leg., Mimosaceae). paﬁ.

give them tobacco, they (two) will prepare it. pee ke nahe ta hipeki, pe nahe yapiape.

they (two) will prepare it. yapiape.

to rise in great. yoruku.

to succeed someone in an activity, to replace someone, to take over from someone. notirayou.

shaman who manages to cure his patients. fimiki nihite.

shaman who manages to cure his patients. naka.

while Jaguar climbed higher up the tree, his arms could less and less embrace the trunk (which became thicker and thicker). irariwe ke pokoku suriroherima.

to climb a tree trunk that cannot be fully embraced by the arms, using a vine wrapped around the ankles. surirai.

the noise the little one was making could be heard: he was really nursing. ihiru ke a wai kruikruimou yaioma.

to produce a noise each time a sip of liquid is swallowed; the sound a baby makes when nursing. kruikruimou.

Exclamation of surprise. tou!.

to collapse, to crumble. hishishiai.

a man has died. ãtãri ãhi kerayoma.

I clearly heard in a dream the song of the raromi konaki birds. raromi konari ke kipi ã mahariri ha topraikukirini.

a type of bird, possibly a species of blackbird or grackle. raromi.

the yawari (a type of animal) also behave like shamans, they sing and dance like shamans. yawari pe kãi hekuramou.

to behave like a shaman, often under the effect of a hallucinogen; to sing and dance like shamans. hekuramorayou.

to rest, to regain breath. wãshimi horuu.

to rest for a moment, to regain breath for a moment. wãshimi horu tou.

to rest, to regain breath. horuu.

"We are tired of hearing them. "wamaki ã wã hirimou wãri. ", he said immediately. ", e kua nokarema.

the piranhas immediately cut the penises of the capuchin monkeys as soon as they coupled. siparariwe ke peni hoashiri ke pe mo wari wetii nokamou ha kuparuni (mit.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to happen immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. hirimou.

to give or receive many objects to/from the same person; to take many objects. prukakei.

pei. nahi thanoku.

pei. thanoku.

cultivated plant, variety of ocumo; Xanthosoma sagittifolium (Araceae). makami.

to coil, to roll up spirally, to hem, to fold the edge of something. yapure.

we slept in Tayari, in that place we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

the man from Tayari destroyed the wasp nest by hitting it repeatedly with his palm. imikini tayari theri kopina pe re sheprarirahei.

a place name. tayari.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with the beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

advanced towards me with open beak. totihioimama.

I will come to visit (lit. ya huko pe yororowe waehetariyo.

I will come to visit. waehetariyo.

he has decided not to visit us anymore, you will certainly say that (lit. yaipe hoã rea ta re kuyahuni, wa e kuuwei ke the.

there where he is, at a distance from us. kuyahuni.

you will not use magic substances (against us, during the fight). we wa the pe hurii mai.

to classify, select, put together objects of the same kind; to choose. yaithakaramo.

he was not hit, we shot arrows at him and all missed the target. wãri the wai rukei ma mai ha, tishikitaa pea ma kure.

to make war. tishikãyou.

ceremonial discourse. miyoma henaki.

ceremonial discourse. miyoma.

(it) belongs to the taxonomy of animals. kopetei mashi.

animal. kopetei.

to drool under the effect of a hallucinogen. fkahu upe hai.

to make one's mouth water. fkahu upe suhao.

saliva, drool, spit. kafu.

to be constantly going back and forth despite being extremely thin (jokingly). mi shoeshoeãprarou.

to become thin, to lose weight. mi shoeke.

to make war. takaharimi.

to close, to become. wãkikiãi.

to have bulging eyes. mamoku poyoyoi.

to have bulging eyes (offensive in the presence of the person referred to). poyoyoi.

(he) was urinating to put out the fire. wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to put out. ruamani.

to extend. rerekeai.

he really could not wake up, he died in that place. a rãi toomi no kirii, iha a nomaa re shoapariyowei (mit.

not being able to fall asleep. toomi.

Mahariri came to hit me. mahariri a wãrini yare re sheparihe.

supernatural being associated with nightmares. mahariri.

the dog has been several days without going hunting, make him kill a tapir. shama ke a ta shemahe, hiima ke a prao he weyaprou ma re korohe.

to spend several nights in a place (different from where one usually lives); to remain several days in a given situation. weyaprou.

ritual. ritual.

the beehive is really splendid, let's drink the honey (mixed with water). puu ke a topraa yaia, pema u ta koa.

to drink. koai.

to return an edge. namo preyukuai.

to return. preyuku.

to lose weight. tutakiwe.

do not persist in going. a kuaai he yatiotihe.

do not persist in going. yatiotihe.

lie down next to me for a while. eyemi ke a ta wariritaru.

to place oneself in that way for a moment. wariritou.

I spoke with those who live intermingled with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pē rē koyokaiwei, ya pē now thaa shoarei kurei.

to be intermingled, to be mixed with people from another or various communities. koyokoo.

to diminish, become smaller, become narrower. wãisipipraw.

prolonged cracking sound. krininimo.

I will destroy your back with my axe (ceremonial dialogue). ipa fãyokorã ke ani pe kofesi yafathoprari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

metal axe. fãyokorã.

my foot hurts. ya mamiki nini.

foot. epie.

bend the arm. poko ta tishakoiku.

to bend the arm, to hang a hammock between two posts (or two trees) too close to each other (the hammock then forms too pronounced an arc). tishakoai.

to smell, to sniff, to snoop. ãkukuãi.

twist, coil. himonemo.

to start repairing a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakaprai.

to cover oneself with one. yahoai.

to receive. pãyerekepei.

él andaba sobre la punta de los pies. the hitesheapraroma.

he walked on tiptoe. hitesheapraroma.

they invited the son of the old woman to participate in a ceremonial dialogue (to make their request). suwe pata pe ihirupi ke a himomai kupariyomahe.

to invite someone to participate in a ceremonial dialogue. teshomomo.

follow closely, approach. prakeai.

tree, cojoba, also called yopo and Anadenanthera peregrina (Leg., Mimosaceae). Mimosakuo.

to have the penis hanging, untied from its cord (contrary to good manners in public). reio.

tomorrow, while you play, you will cover him with your excrement. fenaha ke wa ha iriamoni wa wãri shiipimari (mit.

they had fun, they participated in the presentation dance. the ki iriamoma, the pe praiama.

to have fun, to play, to entertain oneself, to act like a clown; to play by splashing, to play in the water; to perform the presentation dance during a party. iriamoni.

she collected the tobacco without hurrying. pee re nahe re hoketaonoweri.

she collected (the tobacco) without hurrying. hoketaonoweri.

ashes of the korori hi tree with which the condiment is prepared. korori ushi.

a type of fish, pavón estrella or pavón cinchado (Cichlidae). Cichla orinocensis.

a type of fish or tree. orinocensis.

move slowly downstream in a line (bird of prey). pe opi ta katipokiri.

march in a line, approach the shore. katipokiri.

expressing carnal desire. peshi e, peshi e.

female sex organ; she repeats incessantly: . peshiemiri.

to untie. oshokoreprou.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of the Gallineta mountain. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to reach the summit, to move along a summit, to curl up into a ball. pororoai.

I am hungry. nana shimonomi hi.

to be hungry. shimonomi.

to feel the effects of a hallucinogen, illness or any substance. wayu teai.

fruit that can be harvested with a pole. rekamou.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, to break or grab. yãmonimai.

breaking into pieces by hitting from above. yaresheanando.

He turned over (in his hammock) and also it can be The word 'yoawe' in Yanomami means 'Yoawe (mythological figure)'. Yoawe se dio vuelta (en su chinchorro).

he turned over. yoawe.

to show oneself, make oneself known; to expose oneself, to go defiantly to a community where one has been threatened. taamou.

it is said of the pijiguaos when they are totally ripe. wake eãhu.

it is said of pijiguao fruits when they are fully ripe. eãhu.

post that supports the roof of a shapono that is not aligned with the others. tharihiwe.

he left the canoe at the edge of the path that leads to the river. kanawa kãkema.

the canoe is in its usual place. kanãã.

to leave something somewhere. fkanawa.

to become a bad shooter. sinapramai.

to have both eyelids turned inside out (from playing). mamo kasiki yorereai.

to have both eyelids turned inside out (from playing). yorereai.

the flowers of the wapu tree. wapu pei ke hunaki.

flower, blossom. monaki.

to be too high (wall of an object), to become concave on the outside. wapokai.

to get tongue-tied frequently when speaking. aka hãrehewe.

to get tongue-tied, to stammer. ãrehe.

to take two parts for oneself. fãkoho.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

to dominate in size, be larger than. moroko.

several small warts. simopiprou.

manner that the koãmirimi siki have. koahimou.

a bright red mark surrounds the bamboo tip. rahaka a iye harukuwe.

to be naturally stained or circularly marked; to encircle, surround something. harukuwe.

when you are thirsty, you start doing something to take the water. ma u re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokorereni.

to start doing something to take the contents for oneself. oshokoreprai.

they placed a platform high up, and climbed onto it (to ambush). isi ha kana ãki ha thapikini a nohi tikepopima.

small platform made of parallel sticks tied with crosspieces, fixed to a tree for hunters to ambush certain animals. thapikini.

the houses disappeared everywhere a long time ago. yetu hami ke nahiki mraomopotayoma ma re kui.

repeatedly, dispersed, everywhere. yetu.

to be decorated with dots or spots (painted circles); to be speckled with spots, mottled. foni tipikiwe.

to decorate with dots or spots (painted circles); to be speckled with spots, mottled. tipiki.

Cook the cassava and give it to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to make someone eat, to give food to someone. iyamai.

to denounce. hayu.

[he/she] has a foreign body lodged between the eye and the eyelid (perfective). mamo ripupipei.

to have a foreign body or dirt lodged between the eye and the eyelid. ripupipei.

I will not wait to tell the others to strike you with the shaft of a bow (used as a lance), that is what I say. yetu hãto ke ya nahi pata kroshomotamarei ha, ei naha ya hoã kuu tao.

to start striking with a pointed object, to start lancing someone, to start killing with a harpoon-tipped arrow. kroshomotou.

he inhaled a pinch of hallucinogen and passed his hands over the hammock strings. epena ke a re rishiãpraiwei, pei ke the pe peki hami imiki wai waroroataroma.

he inhaled a pinch of hallucinogen and passed his hands over the hammock strings. rishiãpraiwei.

I slipped on the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

to make someone slide by pushing them; to slide (several objects). kahemai.

they got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

1. To get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people). 2. To detach and fall one after another (fruits). weyoyoai.

after they threw her into the water, she transformed into a guabina fish. a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

she transformed into a guabina fish. kemapariheni.

the Shamathari wove an open-weave basket, pressing the fibers together, and attached it to the child's ribs. shamatharini yorehi siki sheniniprai a ha tuyerini, ihiru repoku ha siki rekema.

woven basket. shamatharini.

I have opened the path there (making a detour around the obstacle). iha pei ya mayo pahetia ãyoã shoareherima.

Jaguar took another path and made a long detour. ãyoyo shomi ke yoka ha ira ke a pata ãyoãtaroma.

to place around, surround, make a detour. ãyoyoãi.

the stream ends in a dead end. u he horokoa.

to not lead any further, to end in a dead end (a path, a stream). horokoa.

to intentionally break a long and rigid object by stepping on it. kahekimakei.

in the moment when it had its tail pointing to the ground, Ho- itho ronami killed it. pe teshinapi ithãprao tehe horonami a waikai shoaoma (mit.

(an elongated object). teshinapi.

he/she made someone bend over. mi thorukukei.

to make someone bend over. thorukukei.

I have lost (thrown away) mine. ipa ya hoyarema.

let's go there to knock down my pijiguaos with a stick. ipa rasha peheki ta rekeatu.

where is my bamboo tip of the shiiwe species. weti ipa rafaka shiiwe ke a.

my. -ye.

to have screamed in desperation or panic. eaimorayou.

night came early (to the dwelling). yetu yamaki he titipei.

when night came Jaguar would sleep with his head turned. pe he ha titirini ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma (mit.

to be surprised by night (in a certain place), to be in a certain situation at nightfall. heti.

small and voracious fish adorned with longitudinal bands; lives in mountain rivers. shetitirimi.

to become less rigid, to wrinkle due to the effect of the sun (tobacco leaf). yaharokoprou.

to remove the outer layer of multiple objects. roshiãkei.

to have the thighs separated, to separate them. yoraai.

we advanced cautiously, with our ears on the alert. y amaki yimika opi taatarou kuaaherima.

cautiously. amaki.

(related to) to kill. niya.

we will shoot arrows at the dead jaguar (to weaken or kill it). komi peni ira pemaki nomawe niyape mishiã* hawe.

to weaken or kill someone. mishiã*.

when felling an apia tree, I crushed the ocumo plants. apia ke hini ohinaye ke ya yatikimaparei kuhe.

to crush something by striking it with a stick (perfective form of the verb). yatikikei.

Belongs to the taxonomic category of animals and plants. sherekana3.

in several places they have broken bushes by hand to mark the place where they passed, in a single place several trails cross. hii ke hi pe re keapotayouwehei, pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

to break bushes by hand to mark a path. tahiaikuni.

he was lying on the ground near the lower part of the roof. shikã ha a praoma.

in the morning I was under the effect of hallucinogens. ya prao re henaopoi ke.

to be lying down, to be lying on the ground, to be under the effect of hallucinogens. pratioma.

in the lobe of their ears they had inserted parrot tail feathers. pei yimikaki ha kurikaya the shinaki huuararema.

tail (of a bird). shinaki.

they proliferated (we realized afterwards). pe the pe pararayou no kureshi.

proliferated, spread, intensified (pain). pararayou.

to approach considerably, to get very close. ahetemarei.

to have reddish reflections (perfective). waheherayou.

to fabricate an object such that one side is higher than the other (perfective aspect). werehemakei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). kasi wate.

(he) wanted to see if there were seeds and opened the fruit longitudinally. pei re moku kua ha mini e ka eririprarema.

to open or slit an animal longitudinally along the abdomen. eririprai.

I'm going to kick you. pe kahathorei.

"What if I kick him. "ya wãri ta kahatho sho. ". ".

to want to kick someone. kahathou.

to make beautiful or fabricate beautiful things. wãrishanaprai.

inaccessible den (gets lost under rocks or thick roots). wãripraai.

to germinate, to sprout from the earth. kaup.

to let fruits reach an excessively ripe state. shoporopi.

to call out (incomplete aspect). komiãi.

to call out, to shout. komi.

to start cooking over a flame. frãrãrãprai.

trancar, encerrar, sostener con firmeza un objeto entre otros dos. wãkiãi.

prop up the mortar quickly with short logs. kihi the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ãsho horotow e n i.

to prop up, to support (perfective of the durative form). paihiakei.

they (two) found a twisted oruga on the ground and picked it up. kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepireiwei.

twisted or deformed by cooking. prithothowe.

the otter was curled up in a place where the bank was high and a dead end. pe he weyoweyo horokoape ha, proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

dead end, place where something ends abruptly. horokoape.

they live in two dwellings situated one next to the other. poakawe en fpe peria poakawe.

to be separated or separate oneself from the others to live alone but near them. poakaprou.

without any doubt those two are cowards. y a h e k i puhi wãri upraami ta wawetotani.

to be brave. puhi upraa.

I had the premonition that a snake was going to bite me. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi.

to have a premonition, to have a feeling that something will happen. totihirarepi.

dense, inextricable (vegetation). rasis.

I take beads (I grab a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to catch, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). hohi.

while Danta was climbing up (on a branch), everyone started to climb up. shamariwe ke a pata ha tikeparuhuruni, komi the pe tuoma.

to climb up one after another. tikeparuhuruni.

to tell someone to dry or smoke something. tetekamamai.

red brocket deer; Mazama americana (Cervidae). krokohorimi.

can I enter. ya ta haa.

can I enter?. haa?.

las plantas ya estás grandes, los pecíolos están un poco gruesos. pe henaki pataa waikipariyoma, preãkãwe ke henaki hetho.

mediano, un poco grande. pataa.

my mother-in-law pretends that the wapu fruits are (still) hard. yayeni wapu ke ki hihuwe himai.

my mother-in-law. yaye.

sharp, pointed or thorny parts. nomaki.

his spouse was transformed into stone, with his arrows placed against him. pe heãropi pei ke ma kuprou waikirayouwei ha, shereka ke ki ha waririmareni.

to do incorrectly, to do badly. mis-.

to accompany and guide by the will of the hekura spirits during one of their movements (usually to go and attack another community). puhi hurayou.

saltarín, poseedor de. kihi a no topepi re niyaope, weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, kihi totahi re sheteterati ke ki iha, ya ki kãi ta huyamou ta yaio (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to open the mouth, to open the snout in a threatening manner (animal), to open the beak, to separate the jaws. shetetetou.

diluted honey. rehere uku.

to be diluted, liquid, not thick. rehereai.

no hace mucho tiempo que ellos han derrumbado la tierra de la cavidad donde vive la babilla (para matarla). mothoka ke a fukirio mrai, tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute, pei ke yoshi ha.

cavidad, guarida de ciertos animales. fukirio.

the two women went directly taking another path. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to go directly towards (an enemy, prey, etc.). tiheriproma.

to have passed behind (perfective of the factitive of the durative). ãyorimakei.

it seems that they are losing their strength. the pe mimou he yaharokotou.

losing their strength. yaharokotou.

a creak was heard when the ground began to split. mashitha a hapa hetii tehe the krimou shoarayoma.

creak, crunch. krimou.

to begin to have gray hair. irepiai.

just when the sun is a little high in the sky is when we become generous. kihi ke mothoka kutou totihio tehe the pe shi ihite waroamai totihio.

to become generous. shi ihita.

to be potent (hallucinogenic). fwayu mi hute.

potent (hallucinogenic substance). fwayu.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

trajeron. shiro.

it is said that the feline died (suddenly) when it was still standing. ira a terekeo shoao tehe a wãhã nomarayom a.

two of us advanced crouching to observe the rahara monster. porakapi peni pe opisi terekou tehe, rahara keki mimahe.

to be stopped (animal on four legs); to crouch to advance, or to be advancing like that. terekeo.

I saw in a dream the emerald toucanets throwing magical plants (heri) out of their beaks. aroaromi koshi pe ãhã re kure ihi the pe pehi mahari yutuhoma.

emerald toucanet (bird species). aroaromi.

towards the summit, at the summit. fesika hami.

upriver, upstream. fesika.

receive a small quantity of something. wãisipipei.

(the water) becomes covered with a film. si hererepiai.

to become covered with a film, likely due to bacterial or microorganism activity; water mixed with numerous plant particles. hererepiai.

(mit. yeture e the mi pata titi yopramai ha shoaroherini.

to spread out, to unfold, to deploy. yopramai.

state of trembling or shivering. rutarutawe.

to get wet, to become covered. urere.

to have received and have knowledge of those information. wãhã hiripou.

to have received and have knowledge of those information. hiripou.

direct line. línea directa.

his younger brother, who has the habit of going there to visit, was the one who spoke to them. pe oshe, mihami a re huuwei, pe the pe ã keama ha tharei.

to say something important, inform of a serious event; to make a request (for a good, a favor). keaprai.

to have gotten a blister on the hand. yotihiprariyoma.

don't believe that it is another, it is Kr. ai the pe mãyo puhitihehe, kr. (personal name) the responsible one. re mãyo wãri.

to believe, to think that, to be convinced that. puhitihehe.

thanks to the soap, no doubt it will become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to have become clean/white (perfective of the inchoative). aurayou.

he is angry. hokotomari uthãhi.

to be angry. hokotomari.

to begin to choose. yaiprai.

to be afraid. kaisarami.

I, I go to sit down for a moment. kamiye ya roo aheteo.

I am sick. kamiye ya hariri.

I have a cough. kamiye ya thokopi.

I, me (emphatic). kamiyo.

to make objects fall one after another. prereamai.

a dream made us foresee your arrival. wa thapi kuo shoao k u p r e i.

made. shoao.

to have a good taste. wãnihiwe.

to cover oneself with dew. hemaãhupiãi.

(lit. mroosiri (lit. the people of the flies). el pueblo de las moscas).

flies. mroosiri.

to lift or pry something up using a long pointed object as a lever. iyoremai.

push the embers towards the center of the fire. koã ãshoku hiruru.

push towards center. hiruru.

he will reappear here. a petou koyorupe.

he. petou.

la gallineta se voló y los aparecidos huyeron (al cielo). hãshimori a ha yepraruni no porepi pe rurupeherima.

gallineta (type of bird). hãshimori.

(related to . atayu.

to kneel. hitheikei.

to have hair on each side of the forehead, or pushed back. miki prukakao.

to have hair on each side of the forehead, or pushed back. prukakao.

we approached and went down to the river. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

to go down, to descend. prape.

they hurried to shave the old woman's head, and then threw her into the water. patayoma the he shi hariwe hopaheni, a sheyepareihe.

old woman, important woman. patayoma.

brother-in-law, I am leaving. shori, ya kuhamii.

to set out, to depart. kuhamii.

to cough. othomorãyou.

to fall sick one after the other. haririprou.

to coil, to curl up, to bend over. torayou.

we two, you and I, have shot arrows at the cows. kamiye yahekini ware yahe ki niyama.

you and I will do it. kamiye yahekini yahe the thape.

you and he/she, both of you (subjects of a transitive verb). yahekini.

beings. hekãhekãri.

to become shallow, to decrease in depth. resiai.

upriver speech. atowa shifi.

upriver speech. peipei shifi.

upriver speech. shifi.

canoe too loaded, to the point that water threatens to get inside it. ihetetewe.

it is thin. a hepisi.

thin. hepisi.

it rained all night. sheta, ihi the pe wãri pouamou haruu kuprei.

to rain constantly. pouamou.

hallucinogenic drug. aluuna.

to be about to make one side higher than the other. wereheprai.

to lean two elongated objects against each other. hirikiãi.

aluminum pot. oya.

Gallito hormiguero de cara negra los hizo reir al manchar el rostro de los Hombres con sus deyecciones. hiyomarithaweni ke a ikãã re totihimareiwei, yãnomãmi the moheki ha shiipimarini.

to cause to do something. mare.

to cut in a circular manner, remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object (durative, plural object). shimonenemai.

he took the woman by the arm and penetrated her silently. suwe ke a ipia ha mahitakini, mamikai ke the pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to penetrate a woman. nihorotao.

to stick out the tongue. aka waeo.

to stick out the tongue. wae-.

to pierce or prick in several places (a prey being cooked), to give several objects that have been torn or cut incompletely in a longitudinal direction. eririakei.

to have the skin dyed with a light red varnish obtained from onoto. shopohamou.

brother-in-law, don't say that, don't say it, turn your head towards the central plaza (= look at me). shori kutihe, kutihe, a mi ta yaiparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to turn the head towards, to face. yaiparu.

to clean or paint white several objects. aushirayou.

semen. moumou.

to rise (the day). uheheprou.

to separate, to be separated from others. sherereo.

tree species with white sap used as hallucinogen. shamashamari.

to be lined up, to be aligned. masisiã.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). he yahato.

the canoe is corroded in parts by rot. kanawa a rep i s i.

to become thin, to be corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisai.

he killed two paujíes one after the other. paru- horokoto ri a horohoprarema.

to kill two animals or two enemies during the same expedition. horohoprai.

to become wrinkled, to become flabby (locally). wãpreteãi.

the crab holes are truly there (without doubt there live crabs there). eyoshi ma ta toprarani.

I truly have a lot of cold. ya wahati ma ta yaitani.

truly, really, indeed. toprarani.

(speaks of upriver). shofema.

Its bark is very flexible and separates in one piece. araturi usi.

canelo tree; Croton matourensis (Euphorbiaceae). araturi.

the plants are already big, the petioles are a little thick. pe henaki pataa waikipariyoma, preãkãwe ke henaki hetho.

a little thick/stout. waikipariyoma.

to calm down, to leave tranquil. puhi yãniki.

to calm down, to leave tranquil. yãniki.

to keep an object in place by pressing it with the hand or putting a weight on it. hikipou.

I was going to catch up with them quickly. rope ya pe nosi hurirema.

to reach, to catch up with. inosi.

they prepared totumas (containers), because they intended to consume papilla of pijiguao (fruits) on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

to consume papilla (softened fruits) on the way. koaheriiwehei.

to deteriorate rapidly. wãritiaai.

to become short. horotoprai.

it is nothing other than a pelt of a fox, however its head (upper extremity) has a nice groove. yarushe pei si ma kui wa si he pata yakatowe ta toprapariyohani.

it is nothing other than a pelt of a fox, however its head (upper extremity) has a nice groove. toprapariyohani.

when the day broke. wawetomi wapoko.

to dawn, to break (of day). wakakaai.

to go quickly to help someone. nokatai.

Kaw's father (the person whom Kaw calls father) informed us. kaw.

his/her father, his/her male elder relative in direct line. hiimouwei.

in a place where the river was straight the otter started swimming again at the surface of the water. pe u shaririope hami proro ke a wãri urerou kooimama.

I, I will remain immersed in the pleasant freshness of the water. kamiye pei u ha ya si wai ahi toprao hoowe.

liquid, water; stream of water; honey. shaririope.

vine, liana (unidentified plant or animal); Dioclea guianensis (tree). kuhãwe.

to blink, to flutter the eyelids. misi mitamitamo.

to detest, to hate. nohi wãriãi.

to detest, to hate. wãriãi.

the apparitions came to deposit momo fruits in the agglomeration of hammocks where the winged termites were perching. osheri ke pe hãrokomope hami, porepore ke peni momo ke a papraai (mit.

to pile up on top of each other, to hang hammocks too close together. hãrokomou.

to have a convex mark (hollowed out, and caused by pressure) around the entire circumference (cylindrical or spherical object); to be carved, circularly lowered. exa.

rubber tree; Couma macrocarpa (Apocynaceae). chinchokãnimãri.

we climb the pijiguao palms to collect their fruits. rasha yama ki hirirãi.

the old man was dragged dead along the floor of the dwelling. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

1) to climb a palm or thorny trunk using two crossed poles tied with vines, 2) to strip off a strip of bark by pulling and shaking it, 3) to drag a long object along the ground. hirirãi.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. nowã huo.

you were impregnated (lit. wa shipenarayoma.

to impregnate a woman. shipenam.

catch the oshe aka termite soldiers by inserting a stick into their nest, and offer them to my brother-in-law. oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe.

offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). hipekihe.

and here they are, arriving one after the other, coming to live in my chest. wa ki kuorani, wa ki peripraai ta kuparuhani.

coming to live in my chest. kuparuhani.

Squirrel was moving by jumping from branch to branch. karioriwe ke a wãri yutuaprarou re kuaaiwei (mit.

to move by jumping from branch to branch (a bird, a monkey, etc.). yutuaprarou.

to sit in the water with legs open upon arriving. yetu ha wapu locativo vhvrayou.

to sit in the water with legs open. vhvrayou.

to become soft (unripe fruit). okoshiai.

to start to partially carve or cut circularly. esheheprai.

to be climbing. torereo.

to be climbing. torereo.

his/her/its lungs fell, he/she/it eviscerated completely (lit. pei ke hereki kerayoma, the hushomi yaweteprou totihirayoma.

his/her/its interior became extensive. totihirayoma.

It is because I feel uneasy about my two young sons, whose growth I have watched over. ãtãri ya ãhi mi re hatukeare, ya kipi nohi haruhupou totihio yaro.

young man. joven.

to have scratched or clawed someone repeatedly. tikokorarei.

to pass from night to day, to begin (the day). the haruu uheheprou.

to pass from night to day, to begin (the day). eheprou.

to construct a temporary shelter (a child). yarithakei.

it is always he who procures goods for me. kama ke iha matohi ya pe shiro torerai.

1. To obtain goods habitually from a particular person or community. 2. To steal, take away (multiple objects). torererarei.

path that goes down a slope. timiwe.

he arrived near a small river, quickly gathered the head and threw it into the water. poko u ha a ha waroikuni, the he wãri ha hoketareni, pei u ha he sheyeparema.

is there honey. u pe re kur e.

water. yara.

to limp, to hobble. kayeheai.

to receive a stolen object. thomipei.

I arrived after them, they were peeling guama pods and I sat down. ya waro ha hetaikuni, krepo u pe wãri washeaihe tehe ya rokema.

to attack a surface with a pointed object, remove an object that has been introduced under the skin (thorn, parasite of the chigoe flea type); remove the pod of a legume; peel green plantains using nails and teeth. washe.

to carry, transport an object placed on top of a load. heakamapou.

the hasupi frog lives in shallow burrows. hasupi a kotekea.

shallow burrow. kotekea.

to be locally wrinkled, flabby or soft. wãpreteã.

to form (a boil, abscess). yuupiai.

prop up the mortar quickly with short logs. kihi the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ãsho horotow e n i.

to prop up, to support. paihikei.

Cover your foreheads with white down, yes, that's what must be done. wama weyoku paushimai ha kuparuni, aye minahami.

to decorate, paint and adorn with feathers or bird skins someone or something. paushimai.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. 's condition worsened. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall gravely ill. parohai.

to drink a large quantity of banana puree. kuratha u preai.

to receive a large quantity. prepei.

there is a lot of fishing line (rolled up). matiriawe a sute.

to be thick, dense, compact (everywhere). taprawe.

naturally. naturalmente.

the path is muddy. yo kawehewe.

to be muddy everywhere. kawehewe.

Catch the oshe aka termites and offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to catch termite soldiers of the oshe aka species by inserting a small stick into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). hishãhishã.

father, brother of the father, husband of the paternal aunt. hafem.

as the day never ended, they eventually got tired. the mi haru mraimi ha yãkumi the pe motaai totihioma.

as the fish had stopped biting he returned. yurini ãsitha teai ha mrataruni a korãyoma.

to cease, to stop, to end. mraimi.

to be half-full or half-empty. tayarakapi.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ya ishorayoma.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

the mosquitoes bite (lit. ukushi pe ishou.

to attack, to assault; to kill. ishoma.

to erode, to crumble gradually by action of water; to nibble, to partially crush something with the incisors. washishiai.

to heat food. yotaprai.

the chain vine is concave (actually it is sinuous). rasirasi thotho a mi hopokowe.

concave surface or wall. hopokowe.

just when the sun is a little high in the sky is when we become generous. kihi ke mothoka kutou totihio tehe the pe shi ihite waroamai totihio.

to become generous. shi ihita.

I look at my face in the mirror. mire ke a ha ya moheki m i o.

to look at. wãshiki.

to order tobacco leaves one on top of the other to then form them into a ball that is placed inside a closed basket (durative, plural object). ithorimai.

to order tobacco leaves one on top of the other to then form them into a ball that is placed inside a closed basket. ithorimai.

partially empty dwelling (whose inhabitants left to work outside). yãno a prokotao.

partially empty. prokotao.

extend one or the. poshokoai.

above all, do not return to visit with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

to stand up, to stand. yororoo.

let the tobacco grow well, above all do not put leaves from small white down plants to dry. isitamai ha totihironi, oshe wa e the ki shirikãi tikoo mai: deja que crezca bien el tabaco, sobre todo no pongas a secar hojas de matas demasiaoromashi.

small white down. demasiaoromashi.

(noise, voice) to occur suddenly nearby. wã titetetou.

to occur suddenly nearby (noise, voice). titetetou.

I stretch myself. ya utuo.

is that your voice. kahe wa wã.

he thought it was the puffing of a jaguar. ira ke a wã puhimanowei.

when. wa.

perhaps you have a desire to kill me. pei yare wetiai puhi toprao thawe.

1. To border, limit (a surface) 2. To kill (said during a ceremonial dialogue). wetimai.

to hit someone with the fist during a ritual fight. pariki shei.

palometa (fish species). morichalera.

edible caterpillar (unidentified (animal, plant)). It usually feeds on the leaves of the wayowayo natho vine.. wayowayo.

because I am a turtle eater. totori watimi ya kutaeni.

everyone knows that I am a jaguar killer. ira niyatimi ya ma re kui.

This suffix gives a graceful twist to statements, it is usually found especially in expressions of ceremonial dialogue.. RVtimi.

to become damaged, crushed (extremity of a long object). thekeheprou.

arrowhead. kãmãprai.

to detach, separate from a main body. hoyo.

(speech of upriver). moshotomi.

give me a bamboo arrow point, place it at the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to give to someone an object received from another. torekei.

give that to the one lying in the lower part of the roof. a ta hipeki a re shikãre hami.

to lie down for a moment in the shikã (lower part of the roof) of a dwelling. shikãprao.

to protect from rain. wehetimakei.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). kariri.

to become worn out, to wear out completely. waruhuprou.

I was moving away a lot. ya payekama.

to move away quickly. payeketakei.

I cannot hook it. the rukeproimi.

I cannot hook it. rukeproimi.

brother, don't be angry. ã iwe, a hushuotihe.

don. hushuotihe.

to be locally smooth. frakahaa.

I will make it cook (stirring the broth), I will stir it, then I will eat it, I will eat it. ya ha niyaprarini, ya ha tikuruarini, ya wai ta yaio, ya wai ta yaio.

I will make it cook (stirring the broth). niyaprarini.

to work with a buril. tikeke.

they will scratch you and you will bleed. rukekotii kukei.

they will scratch you. rukekotii.

the Yanomami dedicate themselves all the time to committing malevolent acts. yãnote una sustancia mágica sobre la cabeza de alãmi the ki he reshiprou ma re kuti.

The Yanomami people. Yanoami.

to be afraid. RNpisini.

hermano mayor, sobre todo no vayas a ese lugar and also it can be The word 'miha' in Yanomami means 'there'. ãiwe miha a hehehewãri fuu kuikuhe (habla de río arriba. It is an Adverb. ).

Honey, are you there. puu, miha wa kua kure.

sobre todo. miha.

the dog, big and beautiful, lay (dead) on the ground. hiima ke a pata wãrishanawe yeepraa yaioma.

beautiful, magnificent, splendid. wãrishanawe.

Did they really return using the same path that they took going, which is the correct path. pe pe mi wãri yapahou topraa waikia ke a ta kurani.

correct path/way. kurani.

to squeal (referring to). keekeemou.

to speak with an accent. hawekemou.

the spider monkey that I dreamed presages the arrival of someone. feyemi fãho a thapi wãri kukeyoruma.

spider monkey. feyemi.

to become pot-bellied. makasii.

to have diminished, to have become small. wãisipirayou.

the noise identical to that produced by water being thrown onto embers or glowing ashes. shãkukumi.

to roll up partially, to fold once (the edge of an object). wapureai.

I am no longer a little one (humorous antiphrase, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

fledgling that loses its down, fledgling. harurupi.

I have discovered them before the others. ya the ki ayarema.

I have discovered them before the others. ayarema.

a little forceful, vigorous, noisy. eshi.

to blacken. ennegrecer.

I'm sitting unevenly (lit. ya roa hieti-ai.

to fit poorly, insert imperfectly, close badly. hieti.

to sit in the water with legs open. rehehetou.

flowers of certain plants/trees. kosiki.

to begin to regain consciousness (when one is under the effect of some hallucinogen). wakakaprou.

the váquiros (animals) are stopped (one after the other). ware ke ki hothothoã.

he grabbed worms in a place where there were numerous rocks, he also grabbed a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

to be at rest (animals), to be side by side (rounded masses, rocks). hothothowe.

he is angry. paitanari ãhi.

to be angry. paitanari.

he opened his hammock (hung it) and lay down. yii keki a ha kusherini a perioma.

he is lying in a cotton hammock. yii ke ki ha a peria kure.

cotton hammock. yiiye.

and then I will drink the broth of the stew. y después me beberé el caldo del cocido.

I will drink. beberé.

to be taller, bigger than. torehewe.

we approached and got down to the river. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

to descend, to get down (from a canoe). ithoprapariyo.

cooked the casabe early in the morning. fiki rãmãi fenapraoma.

cooked the casabe early in the morning. fenapraoma.

recently initiated shaman. nanohãri.

let's consume the broth of their cooking, the váquiros who live on the plain. huope, yahe pouku koai ta yaio ke e.

let. huope.

the women went there to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of a temporary shelter. fhurohuroma kreai.

to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of a temporary shelter. kreamahe.

the women were the first to leave, one after the other, bringing food. suwe pe koo parioma, the pe nii kãi koprããi yaioma (mit.

to return bringing something. koprããi.

to be about to have oneself painted with transverse lines by someone else. yãprutapramou.

that the demons of the morning hurry up (lit. waikana theri pe shi ta hariprarukiri.

demons of the morning. waikana.

vessel with a long, slender, somewhat curved neck. orakama.

to be sinuous, to possess numerous meanders (streams of water). shokekewe.

the son-in-law departed first and his father-in-law followed him. pe hekamapi e re pariprariyonowei, pe shii e re nohãã shoakenowei.

to depart first. pariprou.

to have again. hihuprou.

change the subject of a conversation. hãroo.

they brought the large baskets full of chili peppers (near the fire, to dry them). praki re pe thari pata titeteakemahe.

they brought the large baskets full of chili peppers (near the fire, to dry them). titeteakemahe.

he went upstream, and then entered the stream. hi a pe he kãi wãri orahatohorayou tehe a ithoai kupariyoma.

he went upstream. orahatohorayou.

they came here harvesting wild fruits, going upriver in a canoe. kanawa ke a ha the pe pehi kãi mi ha yãmoimani, the pe ni thaoma.

to harvest wild fruits. thaom.

1. To remove a louse stuck to a hair by squeezing it with the nails and making it slide slowly; to detach pieces of meat from a bone with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tireshai.

he had crushed a guaritoto plant against the ground. api ke nasiki wai raipraama kurahari.

to crush, to flatten. u*.

to become iridescent, shimmering. terereãi.

muzzle, snout of certain mammals (tapir, danta, etc.). hiyokasi.

to have heated up, to have become hot. yoprarayou.

to make a woman sterile using shapo. shapopiamai.

to tap or flick with the fingers on an object to remove dirt or insects, for fun to tap a termite nest with the hand so that the termites fall on someone. yoothopei.

a directional or locative form. kuimati.

I glanced. ya mipraai.

to do something for a very short time. praama.

to unravel, untwist, or fray repeatedly. kusheshetou.

at a moderate pace, neither fast nor slow. opihi o: a un ritmo moderado, ni rápido, ni lentamente.

at a moderate pace. opihi.

supernatural being, yai the. It takes possession of the vital principle (pei mi ãmo) and causes rain. peshiemiriwe.

the two breasts, the two teats. pei suheki.

breasts, teats (plural). suheki.

to mix powders by stirring with the fingertips. tikuruprai.

to pile up, to heap up. heruyutuai.

lie here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

lying in opposite directions (with the head next to the feet of the other) in a hammock. yotekei.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. shinahepe.

to be somewhat vast or spacious, to extend over a fairly large area. fhauhuhu.

I'm not going near, I'm going to live in the forest. ya aheteomi, wãyumi ke ya ayou.

To what place did they go to camp in the forest. weti hami pei the pe wãyumi ayou kuhe.

To abandon the permanent dwelling to go live in the forest for a time. fwã-.

to cause a child to become thin and sickly by transgressing the prohibition of having sexual relations during lactation. hayapisiamai.

Bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

to be slightly curved, to have a slightly curved shape; to be twisted (bow, arrow). parokowe.

the rapasimi fish are full of spines. rapasimi pe misikipi heparohowe.

she was very beautiful. riyehewe heparohowe a wãri kuoma.

very, extremely. eparohowe.

frog; Leptodactylus bolivianus (Leptodactylidae). prukumari.

to keep placed in that manner. papou.

It infests very large spiders (hãho, wariomi kohesi) by laying its eggs inside them. Infesta a arañas muy grandes (hãho, wariomi kohesi) poniendo sus huevos dentro de ellas.

large hymenopteran similar to a hornet (unidentified (animal, plant)). warerea.

these ripe fruits are truly delicious. the wai wake wãnihitawe yai.

to become good (quality of an object). wãnihitaai.

he is cured completely. a temi heikiprou.

to be complete (in a certain state); very. feiki.

turtle. Wulffia.

the shore (of the water). pakayumomai.

to close the eyes for a moment. misi mitou.

to introduce by force. kiririãi.

he transports his two children in the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemapou.

to transport an object placed on top of another; to transport a child seated on a load; to transport in a canoe. tikemamapou.

be silent and listen. kahiki ta reparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

be silent and listen. wã hiri.

I approached to put a bamboo tip on my arrow, I thrust the tip into the shaft and sat down next to the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to approach each other to confront in combat, to fall due to a blow. tishishii.

the big worms were tapping against the wall. horema ke the pe pata hipihipipraroma.

I'm going to poke your eye. pe mamo hipipei.

to probe by tapping, to tap repeatedly with an elongated object. hipihipimai.

brother-in-law, you have traveled a long distance. kuyão, wa nohi prahakeherayoma.

brother-in-law. kuyão.

the piapocos perch when they pass over the top of Mount Kanae. kanae keki ora hami mayepiri pe pe ropraai hayuyou no thareshi (cha.

to have the habit of, to frequent. ropraai.

injure the foot with a sharp object. mamiki hiio.

injure. hiio.

to swell, to become swollen (in one place). si thororoai.

to be swollen in several places; to be completely swollen. si thororowe.

to swell, to become swollen. thororo.

to make faces, to clown around. fwãrihotho thai.

to make faces, to clown around. fwãrihotho.

he opened a path pushing away the logs (at the base of the roof), and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to reject someone brusquely. hãiprakei.

many paujíes took flight. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

took flight, flew away. yeprariyo.

to paint crossed lines on the body, to have painted crosses on the body. yãhirio.

they found the black-painted (dead) sorcerers scattered on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

scattered, strewn, spread out on the ground. tikukuwe.

to turn yellow (plant). frãrãprou.

to turn over, to tip over easily. hotetai.

he is the one who wants to kill you and with that intention he got a bamboo tip. ihini re wa riyã matamai ha totihioni wa pehi tea totihirei kurei.

to kill someone. matamai.

to place two objects against each other. rahoakei.

to clean one. wamoretou.

a certain distance, not very far. frapahawe.

they ate, and then they slept. pe ha iyarini pe mioma.

they ate. iyarini.

Titiri, who lives there, wants to kill me, kill me here, I don't say that. kihi titiri a wãri roani, ware niya hore yepiai mapei ha, eyeha ke ware yepirei pe kunomai.

they want to kill me. yepiai.

speech of upriver. ashapama.

the ancestors found refuge under the cacao trees. pohoroa ana hiki ha patapi ke pe he ruo ta no kuperaheshini.

to find refuge. kuperaheshini.

suwepihe: second person singular, your wife. suwepihe: segunda persona del singular, tu esposa.

your wife. suwepihe.

his younger brother, who has the habit of going there to visit, was the one who spoke to them. pe oshe, mihami a re huuwei, pe the pe ã keama ha tharei.

to make an important statement, to inform of a serious event; to make a request (for a good, a favor). keayou.

we went among several to gather the firewood we needed (to cook) the váquiros. ware re yama pe thariki pathothama.

firewood, to gather firewood. tharik.

he grabbed the head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to pull out, to tear off (the end of an elongated and flexible object by pulling it). ahaye.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with the molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

crushed or consumed by crushing it with the molars. watikama.

you don't have to inhale the leaves of these plants, they belong to the y a w a r i. henape koai mai, yawari pe yããpi hena (cha.

leaves from different plants. henape.

The branches hold the roof leaves. Hiyehiye pe masiko shiki.

branches or bushes placed on a roof to hold the leaves in place. hiyehiye.

bent/folded arm. poko tishakoa.

to bend, to fold, to hang in an arched shape. tishakoa.

I will strangle them and pile up their bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

I will pile up their bodies. yototomakei.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty out (of inhabitants). rorokorãyou.

the thunder roars in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to be always arguing. frãrãrãmotayou.

I will not stay for a long time. ya no teteheaiwe.

I will not stay for a long time. teteheaiwe.

to soften (referring to smoked game meat when put to cook in water). uhutai.

bríndale ocumo a tu esposo. feãrohe ke iha oﬁna ke moku ta hipeki.

ocumo. feãrohe.

they have accompanied them. pe yaurayoherii ke a kuhe.

to accompany someone. yaurayou.

dense vegetation. vegesipara.

to lure into a trap, invite people to a party in order to kill them and/or take their women. nomohori.

It generally lives in a dry environment. poshotomi ke pe wai hisiempre en un medio seco. It usually enters the sole of the foot or under the nails, where it swells up by filling its abdomen with eggs, and reaches the size of a bean. Generalmente se inhathomai ha kuikuni, poshotomi ke pe maka wai troduce en la planta del pie o bajo las uñas, donha hãepotopi kuaai ha kuikuni (mit. The indigenous people remove these animals with thorns or needles. ): no pasó de aumenta de tamaño al llenar su abdomen mucho tiempo, la tortuga cayó enferma y su de huevos, y alcanza el tamaño de un garbanvientre se hinchó.

to swell up, become swollen. inhathomai.

to be completely wrinkled, flabby or soft. wãpretewe.

to have sinusoidal lines, made with the nails on a colored background, painted on the chest. tikekeo.

above all, do not come back visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

to adopt a perpendicular position to the ground; to reach the zenith (a star); to stand up. yororãi.

he refused to give away the knife. sipara si a noshi imãpoma.

to refuse to give up an object. imãpou.

you have to sleep in a dirty hammock. yii ke ki tepepishi ha a perio.

to get dirty, to be dirty from dirt or smoke. tepepishiai.

to widen, to expand, to make something wide. thepahaai.

to make an object thicker in all its dimensions. supramarei.

entorchado, envuelto, enrollado sobre sí mismo, enroscado. yãthoriwe.

who was then that woman. weti ke wa the kãi wãri ta suwe ta kunowe sihe ke.

for whom and why are they having fun. weti hami ke the pe re kui wa the pe nohi iriamoãi ta sihewe.

to wonder, to ask oneself. kunowe.

I don't even have cooking banana to cook. ni siquiera tengo ocumo para cocinar.

cooking banana. ocumo.

he opened the hammock he was carrying, and lay down for a while. abierto el chinchorro que traía, y se tendió un buen rato.

open. abierto.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahamai.

the girl that they kidnapped when they attacked us, they certainly carry her on their backs. suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

they carry her on their backs. yehiponowehei.

the ancestors multiplied and became more numerous. porepore ke ki re parai totihionowei (mit.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco. nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma.

1. (verb intransitive) to multiply, proliferate; to spread, propagate; to intensify (pain). 2. (verb transitive) to cause to multiply; to propagate, spread; to aggravate pain. para.

to break intentionally a long and rigid object by stepping on it. kahekirei.

to swell slightly (as the skin after an insect bite). shimokorerariyo.

to tear the segments of palm leaves into thin strips. asgar en tiras ﬁnas los segmentos de las hojas de palma.

to tear into thin strips. asgar.

when the rain stops falling you set off again. maa a wehekeiwei ha wa kãi kua korãyoherii.

when the rain stops falling. wehekeiwei.

to reach a summit, a ridge; to move along the ridge of a hill, to follow a line on the ridge. matotoai.

then you have to place several logs on top of each other. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

shallow water. fu makekewe.

to lie on top of one another, to be sick and lie on one object, then another. makeke.

to place an object below another, to put below. pepikei.

Sorocuá white-tailed went to look for the product of the hunt. kurekurethaweni yaro re a koãi mi ukukema.

Sorocuá white-tailed (mythological ancestor). kurekurethawe.

they were his wife, his daughter and he, the man. ei pe suwepi ke e, pe thee ke e, ei wãro ke a wãri.

her/his husband. wãhãma.

it coils as it falls, like a large turd. hawe shii the pata yorirou.

to fall slowly while coiling or rolling up. yorirai.

Micrastur ruficollis (Falconidae), a bird of prey species. kãwãmãri.

those who are no longer (the deceased). fpe re maomopotuhe.

the deceased. fpe.

occasion. casión.

Are you still feeling afraid. wa kirihou he yatia kure.

to insist, to persist, to do something despite an obstacle or warning. yatia.

to begin to paint circular designs on someone or something. tipikiprai.

look (what happens) there and respond immediately (to what is said about you). mihi a mamo ta hutaru, wa wã haa puhi yopraa ha haiikuni.

to respond immediately. haiiku.

he deposited the termite nest on the ground and tore it open with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

he tore it open with his hands. hureshekema.

to make something browner by mixing it with soot. ushuhuprai.

when the fire was fully lit, Siroromi appeared. kai ke wake pata parai hitititou tehe siroromi ke a petareyoruma.

they entered the dwelling when they were fully painted. the pe yãmou hititiprou tehe shapono hami pe harayoma.

to be fully realized, to be fulfilled, to come to an end. horiã.

people who hate us. hetutuhei.

may I really drink the broth of their stew. yahe pouki koai ta yaio ke e.

broth. pouki.

to hang hammocks outdoors. hakokopramou.

Who are you, that you have a breath that smells of female sex. weti wa mishiãki ni moshiri reprou ayarayou ta kuhawe (cha. (= who are you, who, pretending to be a shaman, nevertheless make love with women) (the shaman detected that smell while in a trance). ).

to have the smell of someone who has just made love, to smell of female sex. moshiri.

that hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

to harm someone. hamimarei.

he pulled the front part of the canoe onto the shore. kanawa ya ora makeai.

he placed the fire on a dry branch of an apia tree. apia ke hi horepi poko shatiope ha wake makekema.

to place on top of something. makeai.

to break into little pieces, to crumble. remakashiprou.

Have you killed one of my male relatives, have you made him disappear. ipa wa ki rafaka hãwetãi, wa ki noﬁ mohotumai ta kurahewe.

to shake a bamboo arrowhead laterally to remove it from the arrow shaft; to kill a man. hãweteãi.

variety of ocumo (tuber plant). isharo.

with circular movements (such as peeling an apple with a knife). shokekekai.

to insist, be stubborn. prakehe.

there is a turtle (on the ground). totori pe praa kure.

a turtle. totori pe.

edible fruit of the kãyuweshirimi hi shrub. kãyuweshi.

to make small, to fabricate small; to give or take in small quantity. wãisipiai.

como no habían renunciado a hacerlo, ellos se pusieron a gemir uno tras otro. ha maoheni pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to run/move from one place to another. tiraaprarai.

give them food (ceremonial dialogue). ke ki ni ta hikãhe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to feed (a very small child by chewing food and giving it mouth-to-mouth); to feed (jokingly, during a ceremonial speech). hikãrei.

fruit that can be harvested by knocking it down with a pole. hiyeamou.

capture the termite soldiers of the oshe aka species by introducing a twig into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). foshe aka hishãi.

to make a child sick by not respecting the sexual prohibitions during the breastfeeding period. foshe wãriãi.

termite soldier of the oshe aka species. foshe.

it is for you, it is yours. fahe.

if he saw someone committing incest, he would not say: "look what they are doing. hei nashomi yãnomãmi ya the wãri tararema ma kui, "e naha pe kuaai ta tharei. ", he would act as if nothing happened. ", ya kuu mai, ya mohotiri pertitaa totihia.

to act indifferently, as if nothing happened. pertitaa.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma (mit.

to form a compact mass. wererope.

to deteriorate, to ruin, to damage (terminative form). wãritiprou.

I soak the wapu fruits. wapu ya ki he paoai.

to submerge, cover with water, make wet. paoai.

lie here the two of you in opposite directions. eyeha ke kipi mohe ta yoteiku.

to lie in opposite directions (with the head next to the feet of the other) in a hammock. yoteo.

I will go look for powerful hekuras in their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make (something) pivot or rotate less than a half turn. hãmorikei.

to address a woman using the term ami, to have this kinship relationship with her. apami.

what can be crushed, cleaned or extracted by striking it with an object. patikamou.

subspecies, variety. amothami.

I leaned against a post that faced the central plaza. hehã nahi ha ya waririoma.

to lean against a post facing the central plaza. waririoma.

son, if he makes your mouth slide to that place, do not bite him. pusi eyemi wa kahiki mãrikãi ha pei wa si wetiai mai.

to rub, to place against, to slide along; to knock an object out of reach using the end of a stick. mãrikiãi.

dry cracking sound made when crushing a louse between the nails; any similar sound. pihimorãyou.

since you have wives, lie down in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yãhãhemayo.

a blackish liquid that dripped quickly from the insect (peti naki) nest. peti naki shiu poyopoyomoma (mit.

a blackish liquid. poyopoyomoma.

they asked Scorpion: "You appoint/point at him. suhirina a nakamahe: "kaheni the ta niyapraayo. " (myth). " (mit.

appoint/point at him/her!. niyapraayo.

to have hung a hammock in the open air. hakokomorayou.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I thrust the point into the shaft and sat down next to the fire of my son-in-law. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi- ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to approach one another to confront in combat, to thrust or insert forcefully by supporting with the hand. tisuai.

to let an enemy escape. hihoataramai.

the (cut) head was moving and came to rub against the leg. pei ke heni matha hurii kuaai ha yaioni.

I was going to reach him quickly. rope ya pe nosi hurirema.

to rub against something, to pursue and reach someone/something. hurikei.

he climbed again and initiated the last part of his ascent [peshekuprou, term. re koonowei, a wãri poushokuaharayoma: volvió a trepar e inició la última parte de su ascenso [peshekuprou, term. ]. ].

initiated the last part of his ascent. peshekuprou.

it was because the woman was a scatterbrain that Teremi eviscerated her. suwe ke the mohoti kuteani teremini the re kakaprareiwei (mit.

because, for, as. kupire.

(in a myth) he cut Moro in two while he was blocked by a fallen tree. shi wãrio.

to make war. si koropirimi.

to position oneself at the stern of a canoe to steer it; to take control of a motor vehicle (neologism). koro teai.

the woman kept sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. suwe ke a mi hore wãheãpraroma, yii ke ki ha a he yohoapraroma.

she kept sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. wãheãpraroma.

when I am like this under the effect of hallucinogens, I always dominate the demons and diseases. hei ya shi wãrii re kure naha ya kuweni no wãri ya pe sheaprai tharei.

the jaguar (magically emerged from a plant) killed one after another all those who were beautiful (lit. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

indicates the repetition of the same act by the same subject or by multiple subjects, at different times; can also connote a frequentative. -opro-.

gather the leaves, we will scatter them again. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, to spread. patheriai.

to become darker in a place (durative). hutei.

above all do not insist on going. huu he yatiprou mai.

to insist repeatedly. yatiprou.

to let meat become infested with fly larvae. mothepiamai.

(example sentence). pei ke the naka hami hi ke the no toromou.

penetrate into the vagina (an object, inadvertently, as happens for example when women walk in the water). toromou.

without the others knowing, he cleared and planted cambures and plantains. kama e theka thaa shoakema, siki tia hãthoãkini.

Tucán carried on his back a machete whose blade shone, he stopped without anyone noticing his presence. sipara ke a pata shutukahe ha yehireni mayepirithawe ke a upraa ha hãthoikuni.

to do something surreptitiously, without others noticing or becoming aware. shutukahe.

this is the place where they bite the still too hard moriches and also it can be The word 'masi' in Yanomami means 'palma pequeña'. heyeha re pe the masi pe wãri hore oai.

exocarp, outer red part of the moriche fruit. masi.

to accompany and guide by the will of the hekura spirits during one of their movements (usually to go and attack another community). puhi hurayou.

to come to have pain in the foot. yutukuprou.

they registered the shore entirely. weyoweyo ke a hititipraremahe.

they consumed/exhausted/registered entirely. hititipraremahe.

I was biting my tongue. ya aka wetioma.

I bit my tongue. wetirayoma.

to be warned, reasonable; to be hospitable, respect social rules, be attentive to others (plural subject, dispersed). puhi hatukeprawe.

that one whom the mouth of X calls father. kahiki re hiimouwei.

to have a father-child relationship. hiimou.

to become good (quality of an object). wãnihitaprou.

the demon of the quicksands dragged him to the bottom of its hole. hushomi ke the ka kuope ha heãhãturiweni ke the re terekirionowei.

it dragged (him/her/it) to the bottom. terekirionowei.

to empty or fill. hayaroai.

all the trees that I cut to collect the honey of the bees oi, get caught, one after the other. okai ma kure, pe he pehi hããtarou tikoo thai.

a fish bone is getting stuck in my throat. yuri ya niosi hããi.

to get caught, to get stuck, to be intercepted. hããi.

they hid it near the entrance. pei yoka horeope ha a hithea shoakemahe.

to hide, to conceal. hithep.

language (of the south of the Orinoco river). mathakiwe.

the others have already crossed. yetu ai the pe pekatua waikiokei.

to cross. pekatu.

to become short, to shrink. hokatar.

at this point the water is not deep. noco.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri.

proper noun referring to a mountain. rihuma.

we are shooting arrows at him. pema a niyapraai.

we (I and them) are at war against them. yama pe niyapraai.

I will shoot an arrowhead-less arrow at him. makasi prokeni ya pehi ta niyapraa sho.

to shoot arrows, to be at war. niyapraa.

she is still a virgin. a ka komi shoawe.

to have a plugged ear, to be deaf. fyimikaki komi.

plugged, virgin (a woman). ka komi.

you will cook them several times in water, and you will eat them hot. wa the pe ha hariaprani, yopri ke wa the pe wape.

you will cook them several times in water. hariaprani.

the leaves are covered in dew. y ã ã pe hena hemaãhupi.

to be covered in dew. hemaãhupir.

female spirit that knows all named places and accompanies shamans when they travel to other communities to kill, and intervenes in conflicts. kahirayoma.

(he/she) clicks the tongue. aka tahamou.

to click the tongue. tahamo.

to possess sharpened bamboo tips. hiroropou.

when all of them had resurrected, they got up quickly. the pe horiã ha hititiraruni, the pe hoketama.

to get up quickly, to rise up quickly. hoketama.

to be completely folded, wrinkled or crumpled. wãikiwe.

to make sticky. husupiamai.

there the Yanomami place themselves on both sides of the herd of tapirs and shoot arrows at them. kihami ware ke ki ha yãnoãmi the ki hore shekiamou yakaroai mapei ha.

to place a child astride (on one. yakarorei.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to divide something into pieces by pulling in opposite directions with the teeth and fingers. wakokai.

I finished polishing the bow. hãto ya nahi hoprarema.

I split the papaya in two. shamakoro ya hakaroprarema.

perfective aspect marker for transitive verbs indicating completion of an action. prare.

they gathered banana leaves. maiyo keki ha kuratha si pe hirapraai yaiomahe (mit.

to keep objects grouped together. hiraprou.

the chigüires invited the butterflies to a feast. kayurifanariwe peni hurari pe shoamahe.

to invite a group of people (family, community) to share food. kayurifanari.

(upriver speech) (myth): the two little partridges gathered a hardened and deformed caterpillar by cooking. prihãhã wei (habla de río arriba.

plural subject (same endings as prihã). prihãhã.

I have itches in various parts. the shihiti piyekewe.

to happen repeatedly, to recur. noti.

it is still dirty. the shami shoawe.

dirty, stained, impure. shami.

to be a little red, to be barely ripe. fwakehehe.

he never looks people in the face, he always averts his gaze, that's how he behaves, could he be a coward. yãnomãmi ke the pe weyeku wãri miprai totihio mai, a humapi reo ha totihioni, a kuo totihiowei ke the yaro, pe the nohi wãri hehewe pewe.

to be a braggart, a chatterbox, to have the habit of threatening without then fulfilling. nohi hehewe.

as it was raining, I stuck palm fronds in the ground to shelter myself. maa a kei ha ya masikoku ithãk e m a.

the path passes under the barrier of palm fronds. masiko e ki re rere hami yoka horea kure.

palm frond used as protection. masikoku.

Translation:. wawa e hena kuprou shoarayoma, yetu ke e.

más estrecho (hueco, cavidad). wãkikãi.

they are really pijiguaos of the light-colored variety. frasha auaurimi pe ma re kui.

that which is white, a white thing, a thing of a light color. aurimi.

I will go to the mountain and eat a lot of nai flowers again. ora hami ke ya ha kuroherini nai ke ya wai koope, kahiki yakei ayapoi.

to eat a lot of something. kuroherini.

hole where crabs live. oko eyoshi.

hole where babillas (fish) live. iwa eyoshi.

Cavity, den of certain animals located on the banks of streams. yoshi.

there where the fish were, all with their heads (towards the same side), he fished them. yuri ke ki naikiri mi puruhou yaiope ha, ki yokama.

to have converged, to have directed towards the same direction, to have oriented the gaze in the same direction. puruhurayou.

to have multiple blisters. thorohorariyo.

I imitated the call of the gallineta, it responded immediately. hãshimo ya ha horãmireni, a wã nokaprariyoma.

to react instinctively and almost instantly to an action or situation, to occur immediately after something, to respond ipso facto. horãmireni.

to twist, to turn. yãwetho.

I'm going to cut the hammock in two. ya thoku pahetiprai.

they cut bushes into pieces that they used as levers to remove. hii ke hi ha pahetirariheni, the mo pata hirurama (mit.

to harvest in this way to give as a gift. pahetikei.

I am hungry. tokona sihi.

to be hungry. tokona.

a hipeatihe: don't give it. a hipeatihe: no lo des.

kuratha re ke ki wake hipea shetekeapotayoma: he distributed the ripe plantains to offer them to each one. kuratha re ke ki wake hipea shetekeapotayoma : él repartió los plátanos maduros para ofrecérselos a cada uno.

to give, to offer. hipeai.

los de Yeprope theri me han golpeado con el lado plano de sus machetes, realmente me hicieron tambalear. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

tambalear, titubear. yoapramai.

to look at someone with anger, to look at someone askance. poruhutou.

when one feels forced to lie down (due to the effect of hallucinogens), the posts that support the roof start to oscillate. the pe peritamai tehe, hãto ke nahi mohe pe hotehotemou.

1. To rock or swing in a hammock by pushing with the body; said of the repetition of the downward movement when one swings on a vine. 2. To oscillate or swing due to the wind; to have the impression that objects are oscillating when one is under the effect of a hallucinogen.. hotehotemou.

to evaporate, to dry out. weheai.

parts. partes.

the child fondles his/her eye. i h iru a mamo hupeo.

to touch oneself, to fondle. hupeo.

to strip off a large splinter of wood from a standing tree (perfective durative). pahathorei.

Aheanariwe ran opening a path through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

mythological ancestor. aheanariwe.

the fish did not delay in jumping out of the water. yetu yuri ke ki homoma.

I have fished fish and also it can be The word 'yuri' in Yanomami means 'fish'. yuri ya ki yokerarema.

you two eat the fish. yuri pe ta wapiri.

to jump out. yuri.

vine; Wulffia baccata (Asteraceae) (lit.: turtle foot). baccata.

I will look for it going around (the place). hei re ya the taeai ãyokãi totihio kuperei.

to go around something, to circumvent. ãyotariyo.

to become smooth; to homogenize, to remove all unblended particles (from a compote). kopeherayou.

he had so much sadness that he quickly returned to the region (inhabited by his parents). yetu the urihi aheteai re korãyouwei, puhipuhipeni.

Sadness, grief; restlessness. puhipuhipe.

raíces. kokoki.

corre hacia mí primero. heyemi ke a ta rereo pariokipiyoru.

come towards me first. pariokipiyoru.

he is angry. apapa siki.

he got angry. hapapatherimi.

to be angry. apapa.

we will return in the morning tomorrow. henaha pemaki koo henaope.

it was your brother who blackened my face with charcoal this morning. y aiheni, ishiishi peni ware mi thaa henakei kuroi.

at dawn they demanded goods. matohi pe ãhã pou henaomahe.

get up early to go kill an enemy (lit: get up early to go kill a male chácharo). pei waheki rãmi henarayou, waheki ha henarini poshe wãro wahe a niyaprarei.

to do something at dawn or early morning. henaokiriope.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while watching the surroundings (when an attack is feared). kohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; in birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. kohesi.

he destroyed the loins of all the children. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

to take something in its entirety (plural object). haikirarei.

to be completely hidden behind or underneath something. shãhoprawe.

he kept it in a cloth bag. sako hami the titipoma.

they kept the banana shoots piled up on Mount Mãiyo. mãiyo ke ki ha kuratha sipe hirapomahe (mit.

he left his tobacco quid on the handle of the stone axe. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma (mit.

To maintain, conserve something in a position; to carry (on the back, in the hand, on the shoulder, etc.). titipoma.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

to have. tuai.

to be arched, curved upwards. kreethe.

to get cut, scratched, marked. si yakekeo.

mark, cut, scratch. lon-.

apúrense a lanzarse al agua. pe ta keo ta haioparu.

slowly, without haste. taaru.

I'm going to paint sinuous lines on the polished part of the lanceolate point. rahaka ya mi eyekeprai.

to be painted with many lines, to be entirely painted. eyekeprawe.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

to be better, to recover (health). manaheprou.

to coincide more, to become false. yokahaprou.

null. masihoto.

if visitors arrive in my absence, while I am hunting, do not forget the rules of hospitality, cook cambur compote for them. yaro ya pe taei tehe, hama pe koprou tehe, wamaki puhi mrai mai, tate wama uku tua heapa.

1. To omit respecting the rules of hospitality or courtesy. 2. To lose one. puhi mrai.

to have a borrowed object. mahipou.

the wariomi koheshi spiders move (by climbing). wariomi koheshiki erekou.

to climb (a tree). nahitha*.

to have memory lapses (habitually). mratamratawe.

to be ugly, to be in bad condition. wãnihita.

(al caer) sobre las rocas punzantes, Danta (estalló) en muchos pedazos que se diseminaron. pei ke ma pe pata namo shirikiope hami shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma (mit.

fragment, piece, part. akatahu.

you have to light the fire. wa wake ha paramapani.

indicates that what is produced has something to do with a center or with the speaker (or with some of their very personal possessions), with fire, water, above or below. -mapariyo.

the head of the jaguar. ncharon.

quickly, he hung the hammock he was carrying in the open air, and lay down for a while. thoo thoku re yehiponowei the ki ha hakokotakini a peritaoma.

hung/suspended his hammock in the open air. hakokotakini.

that the morning demons hurry up (lit. waikana theri pe shi ta hariprarukiri.

to hurry up, to do something quickly. hariprarukiri.

woman who becomes sterile due to shapo. shapopiprou.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). pashiko.

when the woman's belly exploded, the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to cut into several pieces, to chop. tipurai.

brother-in-law, observe the water to see if it is turbid. ãsi, u ushishi kua ta mi.

to become turbid, to stop being clear (a liquid). ushishiai.

that is what I wanted to affirm. e naha kamiyeni pe niya kuu rukemai yaro.

to declare, affirm conclusively. rukemai.

I will destroy your back with the destructive fire of my axe. ei ipa fãyokorã ani, ayawa koshi wakeni, pe kofesi yafathoprarei.

I will destroy your back with the destructive fire of my axe. yafathoprarei.

with this thing one is comfortable, thanks to it it is possible to sleep in good conditions (referring to matches, which allow lighting a fire to keep warm during the night). ihi re the pe ha the pe topramapou, pe the pe mimapou totihio.

to make someone feel comfortable, to receive well; to accommodate a person properly, to provide a comfortable and pleasant situation. topramapou.

how are we going to cook the fish. yuri, weti naha the pe tuamouwe.

we are going to cook. tuamouwe.

the great worms devoured the woman's entrails; when she was emptied, she died and also it can be The word 'ãsi' in Yanomami means 'soft, tender, flexible'. poreriyoma horema ke peni the ãmoku mi watheaprai kupariyoma, pe the ãsiri misi rukei no kureshi.

to be soft, to offer little resistance to pressure; to be porous; to be deflated. ãsi.

to make vegetation move while passing through. prayokorei.

(they) repeated 'let's go'. pe miotihe.

to repeat an act, to do the same thing several times in a row. -taa.

you suspect me, "I am a murderer". ya the ki kãi kopeferima, "wa matohipi toanowehei".

to suspect, believe, think something about someone. kopeferima.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

sharpens. imisiki.

Murciélago, who lived in ancient times, died. hewethawe ke a hapa re perionowei, a nomãrãyoma (mit.

died. nomãrãyoma.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take a portion of someone. hakopa.

a white, edible mushroom that grows on rotting wood. iyoyokei.

the forest smelled good. fnini tiweheo hi a ni kreterioma.

to smell good, to perfume. tiweheo.

the noise of the eyelids of the ceremonial dialogue. poshe mamokasi heã.

eyelids. mamokasi.

Moro approached (the tree hollow), went inside and ate the honey. moro a ha ihetaruni a rukea ha shoariherini, puu u pe watayoma.

to approach, to get close. watayoma.

he immediately scraped the muscles of his neck, then those of his arms. pei re orahi the hami the hokekãi shoaoma, pei poko hami the pe kãi hokekãma.

to scrape, remove the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting superficially, clean the bottom of a pot by scraping. hokekãma.

come, son-in-law, prepare tobacco for me. ei, shetewe, pee ke nahe ta yakihe.

to address someone using the term shete, to be in the relationship of elder to younger or father-in-law to son-in-law. shetemou.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to keep pressed down, to keep in place a light object by placing a heavier one on top of it. patetepou.

to have a foot hurt (from a blow or wound). yutukuwe.

I throw salt (lit. sayu ya keamai.

to throw salt into the cooking water. salo.

they do not eat that (the speaker has just verified it). pe the pe waimi sihei.

the bats ate all the cambures during the night. hewe peni raparimi ki mi wathea harurema sihei.

to infer, to deduce from visible consequences. sihei.

he had placed the blowgun vertically on a rock and kept it hidden on the Mountain-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. rihu ke a ha tikemakini, suwe roope ke ki ha u romapoma.

I got into a canoe with some non-indigenous people and it was on that occasion. nape ihami ya ha tikeaimani iwariwe ya ma hapa tararema.

to place a long object vertically on top of another, or in extension of the other; to sit on top of; to seat a child on a load in a carrying basket to transport them in that way; to tell someone to position themselves in a canoe. tikemakei.

to keep the head extended for a certain time. hiyãhãtao.

my breath stopped coming out of my mouth and came out of my side. pei ya kahiki hami ya mishiãki kuprou mai, roroku hami re ya mishiãki pata preshesheprou ha shoaroni.

to be or put oneself on the side. rorokuo.

to be soldered, stuck together (elongated objects). hohãthãwe.

he was not sitting. a roonomi.

he was not sitting. roonomi.

extend the arm. poko ta kasheshetaru.

extend the arm. kasheshet.

the night extended, and then the light came again. the mi titi yopramai ha shoaroher i n i, e the hiwatuprou mi yapaa korãyoma.

to become bright for a moment, to be more luminous for a moment. hiwatutou.

the noise of branches breaking from a storm was heard (southern Orinoco dialect). fwatori pe pata re kreikreimoperei (habla del sur del Orinoco.

the noise of branches breaking from a storm. kreikreimoperei.

they ran immediately to the garden to harvest chili peppers. hikari hami praki a hukai mi rereo re shoatariyonowei.

to harvest, to pick (fruits/vegetables). hukai.

It is believed that this (tuqueque) enters the anus of sleepers to eat their liver. Se cree que ésta se introduce en el ano de los durmientes para comerles el hígado.

tuqueque; Thecadactylus rapicauda (Gekkonidae). sheshehari.

to lose or throw away several objects successively. yaakei.

to be hungry. shoete.

my companion is affected by the life principle (of the jaguar he killed). thãriye pe wai hihathoprai ke a kure.

to be infected by the life principle of a killed being (human or animal). hihathoprai.

in all the points of the trees against which he had frotted his bloody penis, transverse stripes were seen. pe moroshi iye hãhioheripe hami, hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

to paint or draw transverse lines, to stripe. tiprutu.

ven aquí a agarrarlo. a ta teakipiyoru.

ven aquí a agarrarlo. teakipiyoru.

to be angry. herushirimi.

he went to be with the others. ihami a kuo nareotayoma.

he went to be with the others. nareotayoma.

to call a young boy moka, to address him using that term of kinship. mokamou.

banana plant about to flower. fkuratha si moko mata.

term of kinship. moka.

to begin to grow large (a tobacco plant). kumamasiprou.

the thick chain vine broke. rasirasi thotho pata hetii re kuketayonowei.

it hastily painted some large, poorly made circles on its body. wãritiwe a oni pata roherohemoma.

a heavy rain is coming towards us. maa ke a hoã pata huimai.

big, large. kuketayonowei.

the otter was curled up in a place where the bank was high and a dead end. pe he weyoweyo horokoape ha, proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

dead end, place where something ends abruptly. horokoape.

to make a ball with an object to wrap it. pushuku.

to dry and harden without rotting (a dead log). ãmãrokoãi.

it is undoubtedly because of those constant itches that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

and it is for that reason that I am still a good hunter. ya the pe yaropi niyãi nosiye.

reason, cause, motive. nosiye.

(upriver speech). prukima ãsi.

(upriver speech). prukima.

even the axes of the people of the macaws had their extremities damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

had its extremity damaged. thekeheokei.

as he was blind, they transported him in his hammock. huperipi ha a yehiapraherimahe, pei re peki thaki ha.

they transported him on his hammock because he was blind. yehiapraherimahe.

to finally start speaking calmly. wã okeoprou.

to finally start speaking calmly. okeoprou.

nunca hay que matar a las mujeres. kurahe suwe pe poko hupaimi totihiwe.

to kill someone. hupaimi.

he kept it in a cloth bag. sako hami the titipoma.

they kept the banana shoots piled up on Mount Mãiyo. mãiyo ke ki ha kuratha sipe hirapomahe (mit.

he left his tobacco quid on the handle of the stone axe. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma (mit.

To maintain, conserve something in a position; to carry (on the back, in the hand, on the shoulder, etc.). titipoma.

in several places they have broken bushes by hand to mark the path where they passed, in one place several paths cross. hii ke hi pe re keapotayouwehei, pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

they have broken bushes by hand to mark the path where they passed. keapotayouwehei.

¡ay, fui mordido por una mapanare. aroami keki wãrini yare si wetia yaire hai ke.

mapanare, venomous snake; Bothrops atrox (Viperidae). yaire.

to make an object thick. supraprai.

the onomatopoeic sound representing the noise Yoawe's penis made when he first copulated with the daughter of the aquatic monster Rahararithawe, according to legend. sokã, sokã.

to make love noisily (said by a man). sokã.

to take or obtain a large quantity. hothetherei.

I forgave you (but I have not forgotten). pe nohi asipou poo.

to forgive a serious offense; to renounce revenge. asiamai.

in the place where its (bleeding) fragments were scattered on the ground, the guacamayas wallowed (to paint themselves). a naco hihiwe yapikope ha arari pe tihirumoma.

1) To touch lightly, graze. 2) To drag, rub (e.g. tobacco on hot ashes). 3) To crawl on the ground, wallow (in mud, blood, etc.). tihiru.

I am going to see. morohesirimi.

quédense tranquilos. karihou mai pe ta kuiku.

quedarse tranquilo, no agitarse. karihou.

to fill or empty halfway. hayarokei.

where is it said to be (on the ground). weti the re kure hami the hoã praa.

is said to be. praa.

there is a turtle (on the ground). hei totori pe praa kur e.

look for a moment. a ta mipraa.

I'm going immediately to inform my brother-in-law and also it can be The word 'praa' in Yanomami means 'to dry (something)'. shoriwe iha ya the ta wãripraatu sho.

to be placed, to be situated. praa.

(myth): it curled up to jump, it went up high, it went to the sky. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to become hard like leather, to shrivel up; to curl up on oneself. pusutukei.

He put the termite nest on the ground and broke it with his hands. konakona pe pesi ha prakini a hureshekema.

1. To open by tearing, to tear the wrapping of a package with the fingers; to break with the hand. 2. To hollow out the earth by scratching with the fingers. huresheai.

you will come when I am alone. ya yãmio tehe wa hupe.

to come. yãmio.

The guamo tree grows rapidly, invading abandoned fields. Krepohi ãwẽ korãrã wakĩ korãrãyakĩ.

guamo bejuco tree; Inga edulis (Leg., Mimosaceae). krepohi.

to be afraid. husupirimi.

to make something die, to kill. ahimarei.

to be completely smooth, to be smooth and moist. frikihiwe.

to damage in several parts the edge of a tool by hitting it against a hard object. yakekemararei.

come here. re kepraruhe.

come here. kepraruhe.

his younger brother spoke as dawn was breaking. the mi wakaraai tehe pe oshe re e ã petariyoma.

to rise (the sun); to dawn. wakaraai.

we were stung (several times) by wasps of an unknown (or: unnamed) species. yaithakarawe ke a patani yamareki tikararei.

1. Unknown, that which has no name. 2. Euphemism for a dangerous magical plant.. yaithakarawe.

to extinguish any fire (except those located in the central plaza). ãkikimakei.

Was he wounded by a bamboo arrowhead. rafaka a wãri kuo kuhawe. Is his wound superficial. the si yahea yaiohawe.

to scratch someone with an arrow, causing a superficial wound. yaherei.

he got lost and found Cachicamo on the way. a ha mohoruruni, moro ke a tarareherima.

he got lost. mohoruruni.

(he) was calling out: "father-in-law. shoape. father-in-law. shoape. ". e komima.

they called out for (someone) to come get them (lit: "come get us. "yamare ta koreyo. ", they called out). ", pe komima.

to move while calling out. komiãprarou.

mashed cambures (fruits) that have been pounded and kneaded. tiproka no.

"she will not simply be deceiving me" (he) said to himself. "ware hore mirãmãi peo ma ta thawe", a wãri re kutariyowei.

to deceive someone, to make someone have illusions, to promise someone something and not fulfill it. mirãmai.

to have done/completed something in a specific place. ushikei.

the rocks are covered in moss. maa ma pe kapurashipi.

mossy, covered in moss. kapurashipi.

who has wanted to kill us then. weti ke pe ihirupi wãri perihiweni wa ãhuku kãi niya thai ta kutuhe.

to kill someone. perihiweni.

they gathered to bathe, and when all were painted and adorned with their feathers, they set out for the house of the hekura. pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma, pe yãmoã hititia ha totihirini hekura pe yahipi ha pe hurayoma.

when all were painted and adorned with feathers. totihirini.

to have finished decorating something with crosses. yakirarei.

to pretend to be stupid, to feign ignorance. wã mohotumou.

to pretend not to know, to feign ignorance. mohotumou.

word. ushiriwe.

to be constantly streaked by lightning (sky). yãmimo.

the people of the red partridges painted themselves with color, and also painted the edges of their eyes and feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

they painted themselves, they applied color to themselves. piyekomahe.

Titiri flapped his wings to (make his parasites fall off). titiri pei ke nomapi re yahuhuprouwei.

to flap wings in one place, to flap wings without flying (a bird). yahuhuprou.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal or plant). proromi.

(related to) to be juxtaposed. hakaro.

to shorten. onohãi.

he lay down after having finished cutting firewood. koã ãsho pe ha waikani a perikema.

to finish, to complete a task. waikani.

when there is nothing to eat one does not have much desire to work (lit. enaha re sipe oheprou kuo totihio, the pe ohotamapou ma re mai.

to forget to feed, to leave without appetite to work. ohemarei.

to start unbalancing a container by loading it more on one side than the other. eotoprai.

to make war (lit.: to make each other suffer). ohotamorãyou.

to kill wasps by placing them between two leaves and rubbing one over the other with the hands. hushikiprai.

to crush, grind, soften with the hand. hushikãi.

como no querían desistir, se pusieron a gemir unos tras otros. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to not want to desist, to persist in doing something. maoheni.

machete. hãyovada.

edible fruit of the shãpre uhi tree. shãpre.

it has grown (referring to a river). okomorãyou.

Translation:. hokotomari uthãhi.

I have just killed a woman (lit: I have poured water). mã u ya u riprarei kuhe.

water. uthã.

to deploy (to surround, encircle). horokoprou.

His belly is swelling up. Makasi yahetai.

to have a swollen belly; to be full (of food). makasi yahete.

it oscillated (between their hands). ésta oscilaba (entre sus manos).

oscillated. oscilaba.

to have become thin. hepisirayou.

the souls arrived in a compact group to the dwelling. porepore ke pe warerou ha kuikiyoni.

in a compact mass composed of many elements. kuikiyoni.

Translation:. nakasiki warirorewe.

fruits of the pahakotorawe tree. akasiki.

I hit the tima tree to collect honey, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to open (a hollow object). paweheai.

indicates a recent past, within the same day. ku-prei.

to be under the effect of a hallucinogen. shami-shami.

to start to stink, to start to smell bad. hithãriãi.

send your mother there to harvest corn, there where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to have a limb that appears for an instant (out of the water). shorokorayou.

I roast a banana on the coals. kuratha ya yaai.

to roast on coals. yaai.

he dragged his scrotum on the ground, covered his anus with it, and then quickly penetrated the woman. the posi he yohoporani, pitha hami the aruku pata ha shaiprarani the mo tititai yairayoma.

the testicles; the scrotum. aruku.

he shot at a bird. miha niyãkini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot at, to fire at. niyãkini.

with the clothes one is always bothered by those who want to borrow them (lit. iro siki pe mahimamou no hushuai.

an object that others want to borrow, an object that is frequently borrowed. mahimou.

he kicked him in the belly, and he fell. a kayeritou mi paa re korãyouwei, a sherema.

to kick. kayeritou.

to have caused to be damaged or crushed (extremity of a long object). thekehemakei.

excavo la tierra (asestando golpes con el machete o con el cuchillo) en busca de lombrices. kohoromi ya shiki tiyei.

mientras excavaban la tierra para desenterrar las batatas, éstas cantaban como cantan los piapocos cuando se reúnen. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe huko mo pe mayepimoma (mit.

tallar, tumbar, derrumbar, excavar, desenterrar. tiyei.

to have gathered (perfective aspect of the inchoative). poshoshorayou.

to incarnate a hekura, to behave like a hekura. payemou.

to have the custom of offering boiled plantains to others. weyepou.

to shake vigorously the hand (generally to remove a dangerous insect). yãwethoprai.

to make dizzy, to cause dizziness; to make spin. yãwethomai.

two-toed sloth; Bradypus didactylus (Bradypodidae). The sloth is not eaten, except in some regions where its consumption is limited to the elderly. Shimiyeteopewe: mythological ancestor; hekura. In mythology, Shimiyeteopewe causes the death of Rabipelado and is indirectly the cause of the diversity of birds.. Shimiyeteopewe.

to paint something red. momihãm.

I was walking fast behind them, not in a mediocre way. rereama.

sapoara fish; Semaprochilodus laticeps (Prochilodontidae). uhutitirimi.

to hold in place with the foot. kateterei.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

let's put forked branches at the tips of our arrows (for hunting small birds). rãhãrã pema pe ta hiima.

squat down and put curare tips on your arrows. miha a rii ta yereiku, ahe namoku ta hiima.

to fix at the tip (by tying, nailing, etc.): to tie a hook to the end of a fishing rod, to put a point on an arrow, etc.. hiihiã.

nevertheless, he fell into the water. pe kea he yatipariyoma.

to fall into water. yatipariyo.

to slither arching the body, turning while bringing the arms backwards. akretetou.

he undid the knots that held the vines of his hammock in place. thoo thoku he kushesheprarema.

my older brother comes to me and lies down in my hammock made of vines. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

go, prepare the hammocks to leave. pei ye ao.

hammock made of vines. fthoo.

The ant bites me. Kokoku ẽ koko.

good word. orawe koko.

termite. koko.

I was convinced that a snake was going to bite me and I walked with apprehension. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to feel inquietude, apprehension; to be jealous. haruai.

I was so angry that I remained seated for a long time. ya hushuopi kãi rotaoma.

to remain seated for a long time. rotao.

her older sister. amiwepi.

Estar iniciando la última parte de un trayecto. poushokukei.

He looked exactly like his own father. pe foo the kuope naha foo a kuoma.

father, elder male relative in direct line. Foo.

to look with the corner of the eye for a moment. mamo repotou.

to do it for a moment. repotou.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

to attack, to assault, to kill. ishoa.

tree (taxonomic classification). wãrãri.

the cramps make (someone) thin. shuu peni the pe turekamai.

to make thin (perfect, delayed incompletive). turekerayou.

I'm going to sit on one buttock. ya roa kayarekei.

to sit on one buttock. kayareprou.

the movement of the back forward. aumodo.

to dry by fire, to smoke. tetekou.

very early in the morning she hung the package from her father's hammock rope (near the fire). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

indicates that what is produced has something to do with a center or with the speaker (or with some of their very personal possessions), with fire, water, above or below. -mapa-.

Siroromi arrived (near the woman) when her husband was hunting. pe heãropi a rãmi huaai tehe, siroromi a kopema.

was. huaai.

(he) responded immediately to Titiri's whistle call. titiri kasi ã wãri hirirayou ha a kasi ã nokaprariyo.

swelled, inflated, dilated (perfective form). hirirayou.

él andaba sobre la punta de los pies. the hitesheapraroma.

to stand/walk on tiptoe. hiteshea.

to have said the truth habitually. ehetimorãyou.

to grate (upriver speech). hikri.

the small bamboo point is really very sharp. rahaka ke a wai hitotowe totihiwe.

to have sharpened (bamboo). hitotorei.

to beat someone repeatedly with a stick or club. arikayorayou.

blow me hallucinogen gently. opi the ta shuriripa.

blow hallucinogen. shuriripa.

I don't have anything more (or: I don't have anything more at this moment). ya horiprao.

1. Not daring to ask for something that is needed. 2. Not having any more, being temporarily in a situation of need.. horiprao.

to remain lying across for a long time. priritao.

a type of tree; Pourouma sp. (Cecropiaceae). wapanawe.

to injure one. hãrikiprou.

it is there where they intend to go for a long hunting trip. kiha pe pe niya heniyomou kuprei.

to go for a long hunting trip. heniyomou.

keep closed. fraapou.

to keep closed. fraapou.

al llegar desparramaron por el suelo los paquetes de guabinas. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

they scattered on the ground. yapikohoroperei.

it took us a long time to reach the last part of the journey and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top/summit of a hill or mountain, to climb to the top, to be at the top/summit. poushuku.

it is flooded. shiri a.

to be flooded. shiri.

(antonym of aka porepiai). aka piyeke.

long ago the rocks were empty (the hekura did not yet live in them). hapa proke ke ma kupramoma.

Õmawe shook empty branches to deceive him. omaweni horehore proke ke the henaki raekema.

empty, to return empty-handed. proke.

to bend a finger. fi m ihena shãkoãi.

to bend a finger. shãkoãi.

he went to look for earthworms in a place where rocks were scattered. maa ke mape hothopramope hami kohoromi e shipe torarema.

they are hanging from the posts that support the roof of the ancestors' house. wake hopraretahima ke pe hami the pe pata yakukuprawe waima pukiwe.

indicates that several objects in an identical state are dispersed. prawepe.

to split tobacco leaves along the central vein (durative, plural object). pee nahe repokosimai.

to split a tobacco leaf along the central vein (durative, plural object). repokosimai.

to be very small. kotãkotãmo.

although it is new (the knife), it does not cut much. a ma tutewei a peheri namomi.

although, despite. tutewei.

to have cold. wahatu.

they are aligned (they are grouped in a row). the hirao wirinawe.

to align (low objects). fhiraa.

floated. potakei.

the trails they had left evoked misfortune (they all died by falling into a ravine). pe re kuaaiwei hami pe mãyo no wãi shi hiroprawe.

places where people were before dying. hiroprawe.

(when the child is born) I cut the placenta and smear its blood around its mouth, so it will learn to speak soon. pei ya shiki ha hãniprarini, shiki iyeni ya kahiki yaporemai, aka hayuprou totihiope.

to make a circular motion with the arms; to stir a liquid in that way; to draw a circle. yaporeai.

do not fear them. pe no kiri thatihehe.

do not fear them. thatihehe.

to roll and squeeze tobacco leaves prepared with ash into a wad. pee nahe humiãi.

to squeeze, to press. humi.

to have a relationship of son-in-law or daughter-in-law to a mother-in-law. yesimou.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

to hide an object behind another, to disguise, to conceal by interposing something. shãhokei.

to remain seated in a hammock for a long time. tiperayou.

to have dandruff. mothethewe.

manifestation (of the coolness that precedes dawn). wahariprou.

they got angry. wã rahuhou.

to get angry, to become enraged. raye.

to be happy. wakewerimi.

barely perceptible discontinuous movement manifested on the surface, such as the slight trembling of debris on the water. hipihipiprarou.

this tail will be cooked, the hair will be burned off. shina the wãri tuope, pei pe mi hamope.

to burn hair/feathers before cooking. hamope.

to be partially reduced to powder or ashes; to be locally smoothed. kopehea.

here it really is not healthy (= there is an epidemic). fhei the wãri okehai ma re mai.

those fruits have no taste, the pulp is insipid. pe ki oketiwe, pe ki shãhe okewe.

the hallucinogen is bad (produces little effect). epena a okewe.

1. to lose effect, lose power (of hallucinogen, tobacco, magic substance, curare, etc.); 2. to withstand, not be much affected by bites and stings of venomous animals; 3. to be tasteless, insipid. okeai.

they told me not to do it. yare wasirema.

they told me not to do it. wasirema.

the arrow cane of the ãiãmo people is downriver. ãiãmori pe sherekapi si roo yaiokiri (cha.

warrior, violent, aggressive, bloodthirsty and merciless people. ãiãmo.

he removed the blade fragment with handle that he wore around his neck, and put it on the ground. haoa a re hayuprareiwei, a wai ha prakini.

to keep, possess an object that has been fitted with a handle in a split stick or wedged into a cleft. haopou.

(he) climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honey nests that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi".

to climb a very tall tree in order to get oriented. tipeteonowei.

an enormous anaconda was rising on its back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei (mit.

lower back muscles, back. mapuukapi.

to cause multiple things to swell or inflate (perfective, causative, plural object). thorohomararei.

short. fokãtãmi.

Tell them to be quiet, some of them insist (on saying they're going to war). a wã no wasio ta poo, ai pe the pe ã he prakehou tharei.

1. To insist on what one said, to not change one. wã he prakehe.

to install oneself repeatedly in the lower part of temporary shelters when moving through the forest. shikãt.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then they dropped the club. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

they threw it down. kemaparikirini.

while we walked along the ridge, some went to look for plantains. yamaki ha hesikarini ai peni kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to move along a ridge or mountain crest. hesikarayou.

as the yawari woman clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to change one. aitha.

¿no ves que hay dos calabazas cinerarias. hei hishima ke kipi porakaa ma re totihire.

algunos mostraron sus puntas de flechas de bambú. porakapi peni rahaka ke ki mimahe.

two, dual. porakaa.

to tie solidly. hateteai.

the different songs succeed one another. ãmoã ke pe notiatarai tharahei.

to succeed one another. notiatarai.

they gathered (and then someone said). the pe yototai ha kuparuni.

to remain together for a long time. yototorayou.

piasaba palm, chiquiqui palm; Leopoldinia piassaba (Arecaceae). raharaea.

they approached furtively. prakerayou.

the serpent disappeared (at the edge of the water). oru keki nohi mohotupariyo kuhe.

disappeared. mohotupariyo.

they already went hunting. pe wãri rãmi hua waikirayou ke a kuhe.

went. hua.

to become locally wrinkled, flabby or soft; to let a fruit wrinkle (through negligence). wãpretãi.

to become small (referring to a cotton ball whose thread has been partially used). ãkroãi.

to become sensitive to the taste of rancid butter or oxidized fats. ãsikeprariyo.

their arrows do not reach the whites, they just graze them (= they are poor shooters). ke maima si ki matohipi mãihimapou totihiowei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

not reach. mãihimapou.

uncovered cotton. shinari uku hapresha no.

to uncover, reveal, strip off (e.g. bark, cotton fibers). preshe.

to be the first to do something. shomãrãyou, perf.

to be the first to do something. shomãrãyou.

the spider monkeys move along the trees. hii pe hami pasho pe imii.

come back to me for a moment, keeping your balance. ata imiprao kooima.

to walk balancing, to move along the trees, along the branches. imitaai.

do not attack us. matihe.

do not attack us. matihe.

are you satiated. wa puhi tikrou.

to be satiated, to put on a serious or angry face. tikrou.

sin. aititi.

go kill it (by shooting arrows). a ta niyapraharu.

go hunt váquiros there. ware ke ki ta niyapraharu.

to go and do something (e.g. hunt, kill). niyapraharu.

it was necessary to make many efforts to finally approach him. yãkumi a nape prakea ha yãshiriheni.

to do/achieve something despite difficulties. yãshiriheni.

the ones who were taking refuge (on the mountain, to escape the flood) brought ocumos near with poles in order to plant them. pe he re ruonowei peni, pe niya ha tiaheni, ohina pe rekamahe.

to bring near with a pole. ruonowei.

to be painted with oni haheti wavy or sinuous lines. foni eyekewe.

wavy, sinuous (lines). haheti.

noise produced by the vibrations of a taut string. pãopãomou.

to start twisting or softening a vine or bark. yaproteprai.

It is a lie. hore ke the pe sin.

lie, pretense. hore.

when (he) had the arrow (in the blowgun), he shot it by blowing. rifu masi titipou tehe a horaprarema.

thin arrow made of palm wood with a fire-hardened tip, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. rifu.

hard, rigid, stiff. hiyaka.

my pet animal attacked the fierce beast. thãriye a waitheri re shurukuapiyei.

my pet animal, my companion animal. thãriye.

said of a supernatural being that has thrown a magical substance at a person. fimiki no hori.

said of a supernatural being that has thrown a magical substance at a person. no hori.

looking for turtles (lit. nohi wãsa.

to search, to look for. wãsa.

I only take a dose of the yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi ya ki ayaai.

1. To take only a part of a whole; to collect a part of something and keep the rest for later; to consume something, or to collect the fruits of a tree, partially. 2. To find, discover before others; to notice immediately.. ayaai.

to make. ohotatou : hacer.

to make. ohotatou.

the woman had no children, however he left leaving her alone. suwe shiroko ke a ma kui, a ha takiherin i.

my daughter, could it be that he has abandoned us. shete, yamare wãri ta takeherii kuhawe.

to abandon, to leave someone or something alone in a place. takiherin.

Sloth came down and sat down immediately slowly. shimiyeteopewe a ha ithoruni a opi roa shoakema (mit.

Sloth of two fingers; Bradypus didactylus (Bradypodidae). Mythological ancestor who causes the death of Rabipelado and is indirectly the cause of the diversity of birds.. shimiyeteopewe.

sapoara fish; Semaprochilodus laticeps (Prochilodontidae). uhutitirimi.

to blow (a breeze). huririmou.

it gets dark and also it can be The word 'komã' in Yanomami means 'to have'. ka he komããi.

to get dark. komã.

present tense marker. -aprarai.

to have been partially rolled up, to have been rolled up at the edge. wapureakei.

the apparitions came to deposit momo fruits in the pile of hammocks where the winged termites were perching. osheri ke pe hãrokomope hami, porepore ke peni momo ke a papraai (mit.

to pile up one on top of the other, to hang hammocks too close together. hãrokomope.

ella cogió una hoja tierna de un árbol para coger batatas. huko mo co a coger ajíes; wapu re e kohi hena tuku ha huBot.

batata; Ipomoea batata (Convolvulaceae). huBot.

testicles. Yãno-.

to perforate, to make a hole, to open a package. horosha.

young. oshetiwe.

to become flat, plane, horizontal (the end of an elongated object, especially a stick or piece of wood). tataha.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell gravely ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall gravely ill repeatedly. parohotou.

while Jaguar climbed higher up the tree, his arms could less and less embrace the trunk (which became thicker and thicker). irariwe ke pokoku suriroherima.

to climb a tree trunk that cannot be fully embraced by the arms, using a vine wrapped around the ankles. surirai.

cesta de tejido apretado fabricada por las mujeres con el bejuco masimasi. koe hena.

they went back to their houses and ate there. the pe kooprou ha kooni yaro pe ha pe iyama.

to return home, to go back. kooni.

(unknown). hawekemo.

to start cooking over a flame. frãrãrãprai.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

That one who visits us, he has nothing more to eat in his garden. hei ke a re kure, a re hamamouwei, hei ke a pata ma re hãrokore.

to visit. poriwe.

Fork with multiple prongs. A short-stemmed one is placed at the tip of arrows to kill small birds. A long-stemmed one is used to stir banana compote.. rãhãrãki.

rounded and short (an object). krãkãhewe: redondeado y corto (un objeto).

rounded and short. krãkãhe.

speaks of upriver. yãrekerimi.

in the center (of the fabric), there where it is dense, the Spider-spirit was crouched. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma.

dense, thick (in the center of something). sutaparuni.

to become an orphan. wahatiprou.

they killed váquiros and organized a funerary banquet (lit. ei ke re hunenemore e ha niyamaheni, e pouku re koamaiwehei.

we two have shot arrows at the váquiros. kamiye yahekini ware yahe ki niyama.

the hekura shot arrows at the daughter of the yawari. taritari ke peni yãwãriyoma pe teepi a niyamahe.

to kill, to shoot with an arrow. niyama.

women, I beg you to participate all (in this activity). suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in an activity. hãithoãi.

his/her younger brother, his/her younger sister. pe ai: su hermano menor, su hermana menor.

his younger brother was (tall) like this. kinaha pe feeshe ke e kuoma.

younger sibling (brother or sister). eeshe.

(no translation provided). ku-piye-i.

to stretch by twisting the torso while keeping one arm bent behind the neck. ãkrotãi.

I will make many scratches on you. pe iprushimararei.

I will make many scratches on you. iprushimararei.

the ancestors rushed towards where the cacao tree was. pohoroa ana hi upraope ha poreri ke pe re priririkei.

again the Waika rushed to leave. waika ke pe pririrou kooherima.

to rush, to converge rapidly in the same direction. priririmou.

he immediately scraped the muscles of his neck, then those of his arms. pei re orahi the hami the hokekãi shoaoma, pei poko hami the pe kãi hokekãma.

to scrape, remove the damaged part of a fruit by scraping or cutting superficially, clean the bottom of a pot by scraping. hokekãma.

wing feathers. hakoraki.

ah, los chamanes achicaron la boca del jaguar. hekurapini ira kahiki wãisipipramai tikorayoma.

to make smaller, to reduce. *proma.

to let meat get worm-infested through negligence. moshapiamai.

they will not scold me. nowã raye.

to scold. raye.

plant. rehareha.

to sit or squat (plural subject). rookei.

confront each other only with sticks, do not tie knives to the tips. pe ta wapayo, hii ke hi shironi, sipara wama si hiihãi mai.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. hiihãi.

to have lifted something using a long pointed object as a lever. iyorerarei.

to stagger. wahohoai.

put yourself over there and don't go away (talking about upriver). kihami a wãri ta kuroferi, wa wãri fuu mrai.

in that direction, over there. kuroferi.

(food/prey/fish) that swells and rises to the surface of the water in which it is cooked. hiterayou.

bring here your ugly crooked arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

bring here. yehipoyo.

(speech from upriver). shiokorema.

to be taller, bigger than. torehewe.

to start clearing the ground, to start cleaning it, to start leaving it clean. takakaprai.

don't think you'll be able to express yourself better after drinking the spicy drink. yãimoro wa u ha koani.

child. koani.

he ate toatoa fruits (crushing them with the molars). toatoa ke moku watikama.

crushed or consumed by crushing with the molars. watikikei.

to paint several crosses. yakiramai.

to be completely damaged. eotowe.

I stay behind (I don't go with the others). ya kuo heai.

while the others were away, they stayed at home to make love. yahi hami the pe na wãri wayou ha heani (mit.

the children fight during the absence (of the adults). ihiru the pe sheyeo heai.

to stay behind, do something in the absence of others, or after they have left. heapo.

to acquire reflections, to acquire this tonality locally, to dye or paint yellow, to dye or paint something with a yellowish annatto, to have this tone locally, to have been painted locally with a yellowish color, or to be stained by smoke. frãihiãi.

to darken for a moment. ruwetou.

relationship of father-in-law or mother-in-law to son-in-law. hesiyopiye.

we are not angry. yamaki ã rahumou mai.

to get angry, to become enraged. rahumor.

to be in the process of going to get oneself painted. hirikiprou.

at the moment when (the beast) was going to crush the turtle with its teeth, the hekura stopped it (saying ushu. totori a mori watikiprai tehe, hekura peni "ushu. to prevent that misfortune). ushu.

to start crushing or chewing something with the molars. watikiprai.

sin. kake.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied at different heights. mi wereheo.

to have one side higher than the other, to be unbalanced (canoe); to make an object with one side higher than the other. werehe.

eteweshi. eteweshi.

to make urinate a lot. iheihemomai.

Ouch!. sarai!.

to be a little strong (noise), pungent or acrid. fnakehe.

the Shãshãpiwei mountain whose wall is covered with vertical ochre lines. shãshãpiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherororati.

to be painted or lined with vertical lines. sherororati.

to have kneaded the cassava flour so that it has some liquid inside. urererayou.

make them have sex, their children will be good hunters (or good warriors). pe ta wamomahe, pe pe ihirupi nihitaprope.

to predict that a person will become skilled at archery or shooting. nihitaprope.

suck in your belly. a mi ta wãhetaru.

to suck in the belly. wãhetaru.

pei. huumotho.

to make someone scream in terror. eaimomai.

the two women ran away. suwe ke kipi shi wahi ayoherii.

since the woman was in love with him, she ran away with him. suwe ke ani a nohi ha puhiani a nohi shi wahiai.

1. fugitive woman who has abandoned her community and husband (to join a lover or stop being mistreated). 2. (intransitive verb) to run away, abandon one. shuwahi.

(the branches of) the horoeti trees break easily. horoeti hipe kreyou si ihehewe.

he made the big horoeti tree explode. horoeti hi pata homopramarema.

a type of fragile tree. horoeti.

the cambur fruits are too abundant and spoiling. hei ihiru ke pe rokomipi wãrimou re kupe.

a type of fruit. rokomi.

shook vigorously (perfective). he yomikirayou.

shake vigorously. he yomiki.

he did not delay. weyade.

colorful crest of certain birds. huko shopapi.

feather. shopa.

to be somewhat clear (vegetation), to be somewhat translucent. fwararaha.

to feel stings in the head after having walked a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe.

to vibrate, to experience small shakes; to sway. tirikou.

to leave to deposit, to leave to decant. papeheamai.

Justicia sp. hayakoari henaki.

plant. henaki.

hermano mayor, sobre todo no vayas a ese lugar and also it can be The word 'miha' in Yanomami means 'there'. ãiwe miha a hehehewãri fuu kuikuhe (habla de río arriba. It is an Adverb. ).

Honey, are you there. puu, miha wa kua kure.

sobre todo. miha.

to give a crab to a man following the unokai ritual to gnaw on. washishiprai.

to crush or gnaw completely with the incisors. washishai.

it is wrinkled, it is creased. si wãikiã.

wrinkled, creased. wãikiã.

to have become weak, to have lost vitality. yakarokorayou.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

made several trips. yehiaprakiriomahe.

to build a scaffold. fmathakari thai.

scaffold. fmathakari.

to damage or bend the edge of a sharp instrument. pruekeãmai.

to leave on the ground (a deep container). ithãpou.

Helicops angulatus (Colubridae). Small venomous snake that is often found in water. Its bites are not fatal, but can cause the loss of a finger.. angukopeheprou.

they asked me to go with them and I accompanied them. ware ha nakaheni ya huo nareopeherayou.

they asked me. nakaheni.

to have hiccups. shokomomai.

to be angry. kokoshi.

the path is covered with dry leaves. pei yo heshãheshãpi.

to be covered with plant residues or dry leaves. heshãheshãpiprou.

to become thin, to thin out. hepisiai.

to be happy. wishawishami.

they crossed the morichal (and left it behind). eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

we, the ones who passed (the river), are the people of Shishito. shishito theri yamaki re hayuope.

they passed, they crossed. hayuyou.

I am hungry. hi monapi.

to be hungry. monapi.

edible fruit of the horotoprou palm. horotoprou.

to make love (said by a male speaker). yeriyerimorayou.

to have finished doing something. shikopirayou.

to grow, to mature, to ripen. hãmo.

to shell corn. yono moku hushii.

1. To shell, to shuck. 2. Shelled, shucked. hushishi.

(speaks of upriver). kremonene.

we (I and they) have filled the baskets with pijiguaos. kamiye yamakini rasha yama pe thariki re thaapotayouwei.

we (I and they) have filled the baskets with pijiguaos. thaapotayouwei.

to put a short stick in a prolongation. hoshokoreprai.

to tap with the hand, to prepare a hallucinogen by tapping a leaf on which the powder rests, in order to separate the coarse particles from the fine ones. tirikai.

flat and bony part of the chest, where the ribs meet; to have protruding ribs (to be thin). fpariki yãririwe.

peeled yopo grains. hiprusha.

to make someone accuse. katitiamai.

there the exit is closed. kiha yoka weeatayoa.

closed exit. weeatayoa.

to cut and shape several primary remige feathers intended to form arrow fletching. heki kretitai, dur.

to have cut and shaped several primary remige feathers. heki kretitirarei, perf.

to cut and shape the primary remige feather. heki kretiti-.

fruit of the morã mahi tree. morã ma.

fruit of the morã mahi tree. morã.

Imitate Rashakami. rashakami ke a ta oweprari, ihi.

Mythical warrior. He is brave and not afraid to go to war alone.. rashakami.

they quickly killed him and he was left dying. yetu a nami re waikaiwehei, a porepi harayoma.

to be dying, in agony. porepi.

I am hot. Ya yoprayu.

to be hot, to have heat. yopra.

to have dizziness, to have vertigo. t yipipi.

to have dizziness, to have vertigo. yipipi.

to become dense, thick. sutiti.

the thunder booms in the sky. hei ke a hetu re kui a frãrãrãmotayou.

the fire crackles on the slope of Mount Rihuma. rihuma ki pariki re wake re frãrãrãrãkiri (cha.

to be always arguing. ihuma.

he arrived at a place where there were blue-headed parrots (dispersed in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema.

dispersed (referring to cotorras cabeciazules birds scattered in trees). piyekouwei.

1. small pieces of wood arranged parallel on a wet floor to isolate it and be able to light a fire. 2. to crisscross logs or pieces of wood to sit on (and isolate from the ground). paritha.

cricket. kuyuruma.

perfective form of the factitive verb . aumomarei.

stay calm, don't steal, I won't stop prohibiting you (from bothering others). huritihehe, huritihehe, kiha ya wã no wasio kuyeheo mai ke the.

to prohibit someone from doing something, to indicate with a hand gesture from afar for someone not to go or not to do what they intend to do. wasio.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put the arms above the head, with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident. ruwei.

(ustedes dos) coman carne de danta. shama ke yãhi ta wapiri.

donde los Waika, la albura del arbusto yãri natha es carnosa (gruesa). waika yãri natha pe yãhi ma re totihii.

meat, flesh, muscle. yãhiki.

it is here where I'm going to bathe (speaking from upriver). feha re ya yãrimou pashio shoao.

here (in the place where the speaker is located). pashio.

to get dark (at dusk). itutou.

he did not delay in reaching Aparecido's path, then he walked on a plain. pore re a no mayo hami yeture e he hapraoma, a he yaripekir i o m a.

to walk on a plain, on flat ground. yariai.

to divide into several parts. shetekerarei.

it is said that the feline died (suddenly) while it was still standing. ira a terekeo shoao tehe a wãhã nomarayom a.

the vines (used for tying) loosen due to the heat of the sun. peripo shni thotho pe terekou.

to crawl, walk crouched. terekai.

aggressive way of shouting of the kori bird. wayumou.

to fall ill (and due to this disrupt the course of one. yapekeai.

the white arrows of the birds have the shaft finely grooved. herãmi pe sherekapi au (mit.

the white arrows of the birds. shetitirakiri.

winding river. orarahari ha, kihi u re shokerahari ha.

winding, meandering. shokerahari.

to be covered, to be under. mubajo.

to start doing something of medium or rather large size. proweheprai.

to be decorated with semicircles. rukekewe.

to cut off a piece, to remove a portion by cutting (with a tool resting on the object, cutting guided by the back-and-forth movement of the arm). hãniãkei.

not long ago they came to widen the entrance of the baba's burrow. iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

to widen the opening of a burrow by making the earth fall with a machete, bow or pointed stick. tishiakei.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I pushed the point into the shaft and sat down by the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to introduce with force by pushing with the hand. tisuu.

to make the noise that a taut string makes when vibrating. phãophãomo.

become numb. harihi.

to become rough or sharp. namoprou.

from the moment she returned to being alone, her mother cried for whole days. yãmi pe nii e kuo tehe e miã he weyahaoma.

for whole days. he weyahaoma.

there is a lot of fishing line (rolled up in the roll). matiriawe a sute.

to be thick, dense, compact (everywhere). sutaprawe.

(speaks of upriver). horeweti.

The vine will not break, it is already solid (its bark is rough). hetii mai ke the, pe the thotho sikãã waikirayoma.

1. To develop a new bark after shedding the old one (tree). 2. Vegetation that grows back after clearing. sikosiãi.

(he) smoothed quickly the foot of the horoeti tree. horoeti re hi pata koro re tãihitamarini.

smoothed (it) quickly. tãihitamarini.

to have memory lapses (habitually). mratimratiwe.

edible fruit of the potohi mohi tree. potohi.

to have oneself tonsured by someone else. hopramou.

to start pulverizing, reducing to ashes; to start distributing (game, fish). kopeheprai.

Rabipelado used the aphrodisiac kumi several times to seduce the two women. nãroriweni suwe ke kipi kumimama.

to use an aphrodisiac to seduce women (multiple times). kumimama.

food (game, fish, etc.) that swells and rises to the surface of the water in which it is cooked. hitei.

when it became completely day many bees started to converse. pe the haruu hititiprou tehe puu nari pe ã pruka re wayorayouwei.

to chat, converse, talk. wayorayouwei.

1. to shorten, to shrink (speaking of an arrow that, after receiving several impacts, breaks several times) 2. to repair a broken arrow by shortening it 3. to be short, to be shrunken, to be low and rounded (an object); to be short in stature (a person). hataka.

food prepared with the wapu kohi fruit. wapurema.

osamenta del ala de un ave; conjunto de huesos: húmero, radio, cúbito, carpio, metacarpio y falange. hapresheaesos.

the houses disappeared everywhere a long time ago. yetu hami ke nahiki mraomopotayoma ma re kui.

repeatedly, dispersed, everywhere. yetu.

It grows on the water's edge, it is a plant with thick fleshy leaves, of sagittate-ovate shape. Crece a la orilla del agua, es una planta con hojas gruesas carnosas, de forma sagitado-aovadas.

sagittate-ovate. sagitado-aovadas.

antonym of okãprawe. kushe.

Cover your foreheads with white down, yes, that's what must be done. wama weyoku paushimai ha kuparuni, aye minahami.

to decorate, paint and adorn with feathers or bird skins someone or something. paushimai.

external appearance of beings. sikrãpi siki.

piece of clothing, piece of cloth. iro siki.

sheath of the palm tree. sikro siki hãkãmi.

external covering, form, appearance. sikãpi.

to be locally that color, to be totally that color. momihi.

Aroaromawe advanced towards me with its beak open. aroaromawe kahiki hore shetetou totihioimama.

Guianan toucanet. Aulacorhynchus.

strap or strip from bark (upriver dialect). nai natha siki.

null. horomorewe.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

to add something on top of a load being carried. itherikei.

to be heard clearly (noise, voice); to isolate, separate something; to do something alone. yawerekei.

Horonãmi carried a tapir on his back, on one side of the tapir he had added a collared peccary, and on the other a deer. horonãmi shama a yehipoma, kama roroku ha poshe a yetemakema, ai ke a roroku hami preãri a yetemakema.

1. Add, append. 2. Marry a second wife; make one. yeteamai.

guijarro, piedrita, fragmento de roca. remakashi.

his older brother, who is there, if only we could live in adjacent homes. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

female relative older than Ego (masc. or fem.) with whom Ego has a consanguineous relationship: older sister, mother, mother. tikretao.

the carrying strap stretched out. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to have stretched or extended downwards (perfective). prayukukei.

to be too open, with the edges too far apart (canoe). rekekewe.

the feathers of the blue cotinga swirl in the wind. hei heimi suuku no watori re shuririope ye.

Feathers of a bird after being plucked. suuku.

I mounted a canoe with some non-indigenous people and it was on that occasion that I saw the Roca-del-Espíritu-baba for the first time. nape ihami ya ha tikeaimani iwariwe ya ma hapa tararema.

to mount or ride on a canoe. tikeaimani.

to be floating. potaprawe.

to vomit. apohipe.

(habla de río arriba. mi hapre.

(speaks of upriver). hapre.

he is angry. ya hushuo.

to get angry. hushu.

the pulp of the mahei tree. mahei pe shãhe.

it seems that no one missed their target, all return with a guan. wãri ai the norãmi yakemai mahei, paruri pe kãi pata koã haikitapeihe.

a type of tree. mahei.

the souls invited them one after the other, until the last one. yetu the hi hoã kãi haha haikiapotuheni.

they invited them one after the other, until the last one. ohaikiapotuheni.

they feared a tobacco theft. pee nahe pe nohi horihipomahe.

to be frantic, to be scared. puhi horihou.

to fear, to feel apprehension, to be disconcerted, to be bewildered. horihi.

I cleaned it completely. ya the auprarema.

cleaned it completely. auprarema.

to show oneself, to appear, to be visible. mimou.

he glanced at his son-in-law from time to time because his son-in-law raised his head towards him. a mitai ha nikereroni pe hekamapi e mi nonotia ha.

to raise the head (to look up). nonokei.

to be crowded (a place). hithokoãi.

psychological or logical discomfort. psicorekanaripi.

she put the cassava bread to dry. fiki ha shirikiparini.

cassava bread. fiki.

a magical substance prepared from dried and powdered moth, causing symptoms resembling advanced onchocerciasis (river blindness). kamosi.

to be isolated again. yawererayou.

embryos. iprusha no.

the chiggers detach (from the feet where they are lodged). hihu nape hayoyai.

same meaning as hayo, but with plural subject. fhayoyo.

wild plants/animals in a cultivated field. hikari therimi.

some, a small quantity (of countable objects). porakapi.

dogs lift their leg to urinate. hiima pe waku ayatou pe niaasi keyei tehe.

thigh. wãku.

to climb, to scale (an elevation, a tree). torekekei.

cord that serves to hang a hammock made of lianas. thoo thokutha.

Rope or cord for hanging a hammock made of lianas. thokutha.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. movimienkimarihe.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. movimienkimarihe.

to rub or shake one's feet together to remove dirt before getting into a hammock. mamiki yaisiprou.

to rub or shake one. yaisi.

the Yawari possess batatas in large quantity. yawari peni pruka huko mo pe thapouhe.

possess in large quantity. thapouhe.

to be directed towards the ground, to hang, to sink, to lean towards. wereai.

bamboo shaft. yohomi si.

bamboo shaft. yohomi.

desires. desea.

por aquí pasaron váquiros. heyemi ware ke ki kurayoma.

los Yãnomãmi se transformaron en váquiros. yãnomãmi the pe wareprariyoma ware (mit.

manera de decir que uno comparte la comida de los demás (lit. fware a ni hoã re oore.

váquiro (animal). warepi.

to make an oblong object. torohai.

to be hungry. shoete.

the women grated the cassava, put the dough to dry (over the fire, during the night), and early in the morning they cooked the cassava bread. suwe theni nashi re fiki ha firikikini, fiki ha shirikiparini, fiki rãmai re fenapraonowei.

to grate (upriver speech). firiki.

calf (of the leg). matha shiãpi (pei).

calf. shiãpi.

Rahararitawe came later bringing cassava sticks (to plant). rahararitawe re e nashi siki perai mi huu re heoimaiwei.

bringing. heoimaiwei.

to go to someone. rotaai.

the voice of the ancestor came from the bottom of the den (saying): "come to get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni: "ware ta koreyo. ". ".

come to get me. koreyo.

food that has been cooked in that manner. frãrãrãma.

to let vegetation invade a path. wãkereãmai.

stretch the threads of a new cotton hammock, or of a hammock. paokoprai.

piece of wood that is naturally pointed. yakekewe.

to approach the fire to warm oneself. titeteo.

there is a lot of fishing line (rolled up in the roll). matiriawe a sute.

thick, dense, compact. sute.

to inhale a hallucinogen of poor quality (lit.: to deceive the nose). mirãi.

to assign a limit to. horokoamai.

in the place where I usually go to fetch water. mãu ya u re yakepraaiwei hami.

I serve myself cambur compote (using a gourd). tate ya u yakeai.

to go repeatedly to fetch water, to have the habit of going to fetch water at a particular place. yakepraai.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied one higher than the other. mi wereheo.

to be unbalanced (canoe). werehou.

the little turtle put its foot on land and they grabbed it. totori a wai ha washiritaikuni, a wai ha hurihireheni.

put the foot on land, get out of the water or canoe. washiritaikuni.

the displacement (in the air, in the sky) of the horrible noise that the demon omãyãri makes is barely heard as a faint sound. omãyãri yai the ãsithaki no pata re kiriparuhe, kihami ãmomiã pata yei re piyekope ye.

faint sound, barely perceptible noise. piyekope.

to become small (referring to a cotton ball whose thread has been partially used). ãkroprou.

I possess a bow smeared with resin that is leaning (against something), that is what I say frankly, without hesitation. ipa the nahi sipo tapitapipi ithãpraa hea, ya kuu katitou waikiwe.

to say frankly, without hesitation. katitou.

to scratch someone with an object (durative, plural object). hikekai.

that conuco is yours (yours and theirs). kahe wamaki hikaripi theka.

yours (plural). wamaki.

to have dizziness, to have vertigo. t yipipi.

to have dizziness, to have vertigo. yipipi.

to have an arrow ready to shoot on the bow. shereka maketarei.

to have an arrow ready to shoot on the bow. maketarei.

to blow (a breeze). huriri.

I move away in that direction chasing the little birds. ti: yo me alejo en esa dirección persiguiendo a los pajaritos.

It is good. Ɨhɨki ti.

that can be planted. the pe tiamou.

to move away, to go away. ti.

notice that it is (too) small. a ma re ihirupiwei.

it is (too) small. ihirupiwei.

to make beautiful or fabricate beautiful things. wãrishanaprai.

soy yo quien les ofrecerá a esos dos la parte que les corresponde. kamiyeni ya kipi topei katitio totihio.

me ofrecen de nuevo pescado, vienen uno tras otro. yuri pe ha ware a topei koãhe, ware a topei notiatarouhe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to offer something to several people. toperarei.

to slide along. waroro.

the child did not come down and he abandoned him. ihiru a ithonomi, a takeherima (mit.

to abandon someone. takeherima.

to know perfectly the world of the h ek u r a. ftai mi rekeketou (cha.

know. tai.

I am the Spider-spirit and I am always hanging upside down (on the web). ihohoa shoaa kuyahi (cha.

spider, hanging upside down. ihohoa.

they arranged themselves to surround the rock, and discovered the black-painted (dead) sorcerers scattered on the ground. pei re maki kothe hami the pe ãyorii ha shoaimani, okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe.

they arranged themselves to surround. shoaimani.

they stopped visiting us because they became friends with Yeprope theri. pe pe kãi famamou mrakema, yeprope theri ke pe noﬁmaihe ke yaro (habla de río arriba.

to become friends with someone; to feel friendship for someone. nohimai.

to shoot a small arrow. rihu masi tiheheai.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

1. Small thin palm wood arrow with hardened tip by fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. 2. To scratch, graze, slightly hit (when shooting an arrow). iheheai.

to let fruits reach an excessively ripe state. shoporopi.

to clean one. titheo.

to cure a wound by applying a medicine; to disinfect a wound. herimai (neol.

magical substance; to cure a wound by applying a medicine; to disinfect a wound. yoporo.

pulled the liana gently several times. pe thotho ikoikomoma.

pulled gently several times. ikoikomoma.

spouse. yahamana.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club on him. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to make something or someone fall by pushing them down an inclined plane. nihoromakei.

Moyenayoma protected her daughter (from the jaguar) by putting her on the roof. moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

roof. moyena.

the (bunches of) yahe fruits are low (on the palm trunk). yahatotowe ha the ki yetekea kure.

to hang low, to be near the ground. yaha-.

to pile up, to accumulate. poshosho.

to perforate, to make a hole (inceptive). waresheai.

the baby does not let others hold it. ihiru a noshi imão.

because you refuse to give white people's goods. nape ke wa matohipi noshi imapou ha.

to refuse, reject, not want. imã.

to have received a dose of hallucinogen blown forcefully into one. tikaroprapei.

It has sprouted. Shipukutupi wakexi.

to sprout, to grow. shipukutupi.

they are the ones who saved me, if the Whites had not been there I would not have returned, I would have died there. ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuhahei, nape pe kuo mai kuoma ya kooyoruu mai ke the, ya nomaa hearayou ke a no kureshi.

they are the ones who saved me. ihi re peni ware mi thapou kuhahei.

the urine caused the tearing of the leaves. pei re niaasi peni yãã henaki hetimai kupariyoma.

to break an elongated object by applying pressure, to tear, to produce a tear or rupture. hetimarei.

with the reahu other different rituals are usually celebrated. con el reahu se celebran habitualmente otros rituales diferentes.

banquet. reahu.

stagnant water covered with a film. si hererepi.

stagnant water covered with a film, likely due to bacterial or microorganism activity; water containing many plant particles. hererepi.

I don't have a tobacco quid under my lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

Nosiriwe was sobbing for lack of tobacco. nosiriwe ke a peshiri miã ɨkɨma.

lack of tobacco. peshiri.

to be barely dark. ruwehehe.

to paint, adorn with designs. yãhiri.

come, little brother, don't leave the path, be careful of the snake. hapo, oãsi, a paatihe, oru keki.

be careful. keki.

the feathers of the crested curassow surround the base of its spear points, observe them well. pei ke ãtãripi ãhi perf.

to be habitually prohibited around something. ãyoyowe.

he will not accept sending the woman to have sex. suwe a noshi imãrei.

to refuse to give an object; to refuse to send a woman to have sex; to refuse to entrust a baby to someone else. imãrei.

to clean one. hishão.

to be agitated on the surface. hirehiremou.

Upstream is the river. Sekisekima bla de río arriba.

upstream. sekisekima.

to separate the edges of something (by burning it from the inside). hauhukei.

he/she arrived at his/her house. kama pe yahi hami a koprãriyoma.

arrived at his/her house. koprãriyoma.

to be naturally in that state, to have the end flat and smooth. simitiwe.

ant; Cephalotes atratus (Hymenoptera: Myrmicinae). huperima.

Horonami picked up the stone axe and cut Cachicamo in two. horonamini poo a ha hokereni, moro a pahetiprarema (mit.

I found (picked up) an old arrow in the forest. urihi hami shereka hote ya hokerema.

to gather, to collect, to pick up. hokerema.

the manaka palms surrounded the base of a small hill. ei naha ke the yeprihio kuope ha, manaka yahatoto hami the pehi kãi ha tiwaroikuni.

Tapir circled the top of the mountain, carrying a girl having her first menstruation on his back. shamariwe pei keki heaka hami a pata tiwarou ha kuparuni, yipi the suwe ha yehireni (mit.

to walk around in a circle, to circumambulate. tiwarorayou.

siki. kitapito.

to remove something by scratching once with the fingernail; to scratch someone once. tikokoprai.

they (two) leaned the scaffold on the sharp edge of Mount Sipara. sipara ke V.

sharp edge or blade of an object. makepia.

while the young men tie leaves (to represent the effigy of an enemy) go to position (lit. huya peni henaki okãihe tehe, mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripaharuhe.

go to position (lit.: set up their bows) in front of the path. paripaharuhe.

I will also scratch you repeatedly. pe si hukekea mi hetur a r e i.

to scratch repeatedly (perfective of the inchoative). hukekerei.

cuando ustedes lanzan los demonios de la enfermedad (no wãri) en dirección a seres humanos, éstos convergen hacia ellos (para contaminarlos). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

to converge (perfective form). prukarayou.

trees (plural). nathohiki.

we moved away as quickly as possible. yamaki rope sheyesheyemoherima.

to move rapidly; to swim quickly. fsheyesheyemou.

in an instant we went to get wood, then I quickly went to gather the leaves (that I needed to cover the roof of my shelter). yetu yama the ãshope ha pathothani, yetu yãã re ya henaki perema.

to work together; to exchange goods (during a trade). ãshope.

to have engendered a male child (in a ceremonial dialogue). fipa ya he okãpe.

I broke off (with the hand) a piece of the hallucinogenic paste to offer it. epena ya kekema.

throw me the loincloth. wayuko ta sheyepa.

to tie, to bind, to attach, to fix, to unite, to engender, to offer, to hang, to open, to blow, to throw, to go down, to arrive, to produce, to disappoint. pe.

to leave someone in ignorance, to forget to inform someone. mohotupou.

to become purulent. niyokei.

maleficent supernatural beings associated with the forest. urihiri.

maleficent supernatural beings associated with the forest. urihiri.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, to become bigger than (perfective form of the inchoative verb). morokorãyou.

I'm going to hit you in the side. pe sherenaki shekei.

to hit someone in the side (lit: to hit someone in the lung). sherenaki shekei.

with this food; arrows. con esta comida; pema a wãri waiﬂechas. 2. 2. To accompany someone back. Acompañar de regreso a alguien [p e- shosho.

(food name). shosho.

to begin. thopokopiai.

He was behaving like a 'White' person (during a ceremonial discourse). Comtaei mi ha hutaaruheriini.

to behave like a . hutaaruheriini.

I will get myself cured (a wound). ya herimamou.

what is coated with a black resin (the inside of a gourd). no ushimamou.

cassava flour is toasted (to make cassava bread). nashi hi rãmamou.

the bow is properly tensioned. hãto nahi iyomamou totihitawe.

to get something done to oneself, to have something habitually done, intrinsic quality of an object. herimamou.

the end of the stick is twisted several times. the hi ora toyekewe.

completely twisted or bent; twisted in several places. toyekewe.

he returned directly to his house. a shariria korayoherima, kama pe yahipi hami.

to go straight, to go directly. shariria.

there, they metamorphosed, they transformed into supernatural beings in front of themselves. yãiki iha wa pe pruka yairariyoma ta no thare.

they metamorphosed, they transformed into supernatural beings. yairariyoma.

in the place where its (bleeding) fragments were scattered on the ground, the guacamayas wallowed (to paint themselves). a naco hihiwe yapikope ha arari pe tihirumoma.

1) To touch lightly, graze. 2) To drag, rub (e.g. tobacco on hot ashes). 3) To crawl on the ground, wallow (in mud, blood, etc.). tihiru.

the great Teremi carried in his arms a small cachicamo with wrinkled skin, thirsty (for milk). teremi ke a patani, opo si ãikiwe ke a wai amishiri ha yakareni.

to carry a small child or animal in one. yakareni.

to have a mark in one place. namo ka yakekea.

to mark. yakeke.

each will spread them out again and also it can be The word 'pe' in Yanomami means 'to be able'. pe the patherio koope ke.

to decapitate. he peprai: decapitar.

each. pe.

to be a little dark. ruwehe.

the Yanomami dedicate themselves always to committing malevolent acts. alãmi the ki he reshiprou ma re kuti.

to dedicate all the time to sorcery. alãmi.

in a place where numerous pointed rocks stood close together, the fragments of Danta (after his fall) were scattered. pei ke mape pata namo shirikiope ha shamariwe a pata akatahu yapikirariyoma.

close together. shirikãi.

we went down the slope rolling with the arrows in the hand. shereka yama pe porani yamaki nihoropraakirioma.

with the arrows in the hand. nihoropraakirioma.

the smell of decomposing vegetables. rutheruthe ke pe ni.

the smell of decomposing vegetables. rutheruthe.

the two went out. ke kipi harayo ma.

I launched an attack (against the enemies). ya pe wãri re shurukuruhe ye.

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs. -rayo.

if they kill a big fat tapir near the lagoon, you all will go to the conuco to look for plantains to go with it. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe a wãri wawewawe praope ha kuratha wamaki ha toararini wama a tehiape.

lagoon, pond, marsh, etc.. toararini.

they will offer sweet potatoes. huko mo e pe hipemahe.

to offer. hipemahe.

I had the intention to participate in a war expedition, that's why I returned home. ya niya ha wayu funi ya koo kuprerei.

expedition. funi.

the fierce beast approached rapidly. y aro ke a pata re ikuikutakeiwei.

to approach rapidly. ikuikutakeiwei.

como no poseemos escopeta para cazar, te mataré con mis flechas a mi vez. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani.

to kill with arrows. pashia.

the váquiros escaped immediately, being accompanied by Sherekanawe. ware ke ki tokua shoarayoma, sherekanawe a rurureherima.

to frequently exchange (an object) or be accompanied during travel. ruruaprai.

(turning) the legs of a dead bird. mamisiki yorekai.

to turn the legs of a dead bird so that the claws catch behind the thighs (to carry it on the back). yorekekei.

his older brother, who is there, if only we could live in adjacent homes. kihi amipi a re kui yafeki fe wai tikretao ha ta yaio.

you and I, we older relatives, are going to live together. kamiye ke yafeki yaiprariyo.

older female relative. yafeki.

to the one who barks, put it around my neck (= give me a dog). hei a re houhoumouwei, pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

balancing on the tip of the tree, Woodpecker stretched out his neck to examine the surroundings (myth). hii ke the hi wai ihete hami eshãmiriwe oraki kayahaapraroma (mit.

to suffer from strabismus (offensive term), to have a twisted neck, to have the head not exactly in line with the neck (very offensive). ashewe.

your niece, the daughter of your sister, the wife of your son. thathehe.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

messenger. teshomomi.

to paint a transverse line on the body. yaprutao.

peeled. hikeka.

the old woman of dark complexion, after they threw her into the water, transformed into a guabina fish. patayoma the rii re potepionowei, pe ha kemapariheni, a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

to become dark, to take on a dark shade, to tan. potepiai.

the cave of Yotenama had a strange smell of a wild beast. yotenama ke theka ni pata yaithapi ni huthethewe yaiwe.

to smell like a wild beast, to have a strong and dense odor. huthehewe.

it hurts him/her. mamiki yutukuai.

to hurt. yutuku.

that the demons of bitterness fall to the ground, since you want to make me kill. hei a pitha re praope, a koãmiri prerei ma yaio mapei ha, ware niya sheamai ta ayaoyo.

demons of bitterness. praope.

as she was afraid, she looked constantly at the sun. a kiri ha mothoka mipraama.

looked constantly. mipraama.

to live without ceasing in different places. ononoomi.

it is slightly shiny. the wãisipi mimou tapihiwe.

1. A little greasy (same inflections as tapi). 2. A little shiny, a little shiny (like a surface slightly impregnated with oil).. ftapihi.

to have gone down abruptly from a hammock. waheherayou.

he went to live at Warapawe. a peria mahikema.

went to live. mahikema.

Look. paiki yai.

Look!. paiki.

adolescent terrestrial mammal. okaro.

habla de río arriba. sikrã.

to fill up to the brim. he maniki.

when the Yanomami woman arrived at her house. do a la mujer yãnomãmi, él llegó a su casa.

woman. mujer.

is always calling out, shouting. komipethawe.

to hang downwards. colgar en dirección al suelo.

to hang. colgar.

palm; Astrocaryum sp. (Arecaceae). pafa.

to make a hole in the ground. shirãkorãthawe.

he will catch it in flight. the nokarei.

he/she/it will catch it in flight. nokarei.

they are the ones who make me advance ahead as an explorer (when they go to war). re the peni yare nosi pariapramai totihiowei.

to advance ahead as an explorer. pariprarai.

there live the aggressive omãyãri. kihi omãyãri ke pe re waitheripe.

to make his path unrecognizable (impassable). waitheripe.

to be dragged by the fall of an object. pakiai.

when he recovers consciousness, he will start climbing again. a harou tehe a tuo kope.

to recover consciousness (plural subject). haroprou.

to emerge, come out. ure.

(related to) to kill. thehi.

those who did not work. pe re ohotamou mãoheni.

as she was pregnant and was not running fast, the jaguar killed her. the shipenapi yaro the haiprou ha mãoni irani a sherema (mit.

as they did not want to give up, one after the other they began to groan. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma (mit.

expresses the negation of a verb in the imperfective aspect in the presence of a temporal marker of the epistemic modality. mãoheni.

to shout when in a dangerous situation, to call for help. sirãrãmou.

speech from upriver. sirã.

to be afraid. pisimi.

above all, do not come back visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to stand up vertically; to arrive at the zenith (a celestial body); to stand. yororoprou.

prop up the mortar quickly with short logs. kihi the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ãsho horotow e n i.

to prop up, to support. paihikei.

language. praharu.

sazonar con picante. prakipiprai.

to become foggy. hukosiãi.

they already went hunting. pe wãri rãmi hua waikirayou ke a kuhe.

already. waikirayou.

Rabipelado se levantó del chinchorro y se dirigió hacia las dos mujeres que lloraban al muerto. suwe re ke kipi puhi re hãkihihou hami nãro a hoketou re shoarayouwei.

dead. hãkihihou.

the vines (that serve to tie) loosen due to the heat of the sun. hotho pe terekou.

vines. hotho.

then, what is happening to them (where they are). weti naha pei wamaki kuaai kupiyewe.

to be in a certain state in a place different from the place of utterance. piyewe.

they had fun splashing each other and putting their faces under water. the ki hamishayou ha, the ki mohe kaoayoma.

to splash or sprinkle someone or something once. hamishai.

her first menstrual period. shorororeglas.

I have a desire to chew tobacco. nahe karepou shi toprao.

to chew. toprao.

convertirse en mal tirador (después de haber sido hábil en el pasado). simaprou.

se dieron cuenta de que Cucarachero no se divertía. osheanariwe a iriamou mrai a re tapareiwehei.

cucarachero (a type of bird). osheanariwe.

the son-in-law went ahead first and his father-in-law followed him. pe hekamapi e re pariprariyonowei, pe shii e re nohãã shoakenowei.

the son-in-law went ahead first. pariprariyonowei.

the night fell immediately while the down (of the bird) was falling. u pe tishishii tehe yetu ke e the mi titi ha.

to fall due to a blow. tishishirayou.

when they were close, they gathered to bathe. pe oweai tehe pe yãrimou kãi hiraoma.

gathered. yãrimou.

to begin to descend (twilight, at the moment when the sun disappears on the horizon). weyahaai.

Scrape it quickly with the machete. siparani wa the ha horerehorereprarini.

to rub, scrape, clean by rubbing. horere.

he remained in the tree until dawn and, being prudent, he controlled that the tree did not tremble. ha re the tikrea he haruma, a ha moyaweoni the hi tiikou mima.

to tremble (an object), to vibrate, to oscillate. moyaweoni.

(the container that contains) my kashuhuri seeds is covered. kashuhuriye ke pe he yohoa kure.

red and black seed of the kashuhuri hi tree. kashuhuri.

to bend the edge of an instrument when striking too hard a surface (generally good steel breaks, poor quality steel bends and twists). tishikimãi.

to bend, to curve. pehu.

it was useless for the son to feel despair, they threw his mother into the water. pe ihirupi ke e puhi uhutuai ma perani, pe nii e kea shoamaparemahe.

to feel a sudden great sadness. uhututou.

I stirred the cambur compote repeatedly. tate ya uku yakoretaama.

to stir or revolve repeatedly. yakoretaama.

a complex verb composed of the iterative taa, the causative or permissive ma, and the perfective re, followed by a tense marker. In the presence of derived forms, modals or others characterized by the same phonological conditioning, taamare becomes taamari. taamare.

it was he who held my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to hold an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kao.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

to visit someone at their house. Yoroporiwe.

there where you are, near you. heweriwe a mimou shoa.

where you are. heweriwe.

he traced a sinuous line (on his forehead) and immediately put himself on the way to the shapono. the mi hore ha tikekeikuni yetu the wãri ha ikutaikuni, shapono hami.

he put himself on the way to the shapono (a communal house). ikutaikuni.

we approached and went down to the river. yamaki re ukukeiwei, yamaki ithoprapariyo.

perfective aspect of an intransitive verb or middle voice verb. -praparu.

to smooth, to homogenize. kopehe.

they put bamboo tips on their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

let's put forked branches on the pu. rãhãrã pema pe ta hiima.

to fix at the end (by tying, nailing, etc.); to tie a hook to the end of a fishing line, to put a point on an arrow, etc.. hiiãi.

ése de la comunidad de Horetoi cuya piel está cubierta de manchas blancas se propone venir a atacarme por medio de hechizos. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

a community name. Horetoi.

It is believed that this (tuqueque) enters the anus of sleepers to eat their liver. Se cree que ésta se introduce en el ano de los durmientes para comerles el hígado.

tuqueque; Thecadactylus rapicauda (Gekkonidae). sheshehari.

in each place where he had dried his bleeding penis on the trees he had left marked (red) lines. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami hiki tiprutuwe (mit.

as he felt no resistance, he introduced his penis between the pubic hairs (of the woman). the prore ha koikoi pe ha the moroshi epehetou re shoarayouwei (mit.

penis. fmoroshi.

recover, it was the plantains that made you feel that way. a ta oweheri, kuratha ani wa shi wãrirayou kuhe (mit.

to recover, to get better. oweheai.

1) that can be taught; 2) to eat a food by cutting it with the incisors, to eat a cambur in that way. weheri.

puesto que en el camino él quería sembrar una caña para hacer flechas, partió un pedazo corto y cuando pasó por la cima de la montaña lo enterró oblicuamente. shereka ke ha niya ha tiaherini, horotowe ke a ha keprarini, hehu pororo ha a hirerekeherima.

to plant (a single plant). tiaherini.

(he) began shaving the head of the young man, who was sitting there, (so that he would have) a shaved head. a ruruaprarai ha kutaruni, pe wai puhio ke yaro, he re mãrokoshi.

to begin shaving someone. ruruaprarai.

I fold the loincloth in two. wayuko ya ki shãkoprai.

to fold in two. shãkokei.

the little turtle set foot on land and they grabbed it. totori a wai ha washiritaikuni, a wai ha hurihireheni.

they grabbed it. hurihireheni.

to crush with the foot. katete.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. nakareheni.

to make a hole. wayapotoremi.

in an irregular manner. parereprou.

they live in two dwellings situated next to each other. peria poakawe.

live in two dwellings situated next to each other. poakawe.

don't insist on repeating that, that's what I'm saying. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

to insist, to persist, to be stubborn; to do something overcoming an obstacle or ignoring a contrary warning. yatiai.

the raw ones were placed on top, while the cooked ones, all twisted, reached to the bottom (of the package). heaka ka ha riye ke pe re kui, ei ripi ke the pe tosheshewe ma manikio kohomoo tehe.

to the bottom. kohomoo.

is that machete that you like to carry on your back really yours. miha ahe sipara wa yehipou pea kure e.

her husband had tied together two bunches of pijiguaos and was carrying them on his back. pe heãropi e naha rasha ke ki pata ha parekereni, a yehipoma.

to carry on one. yehipou.

it's fogged up, it's misty. fthe mimou ihirashipi.

cloudy, foggy; to be misty, obscured, fogged up. ihirashipi.

they already came (one after another) to get paid. ihi re pe no koprããmãi ha tharei.

to come one after another to get paid (neologism). koprããmãi.

when I kill a peccary, I carry it whole like that. kamiyeni ware ya pe pata ha niyaprani, ya pe pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

to carry a whole animal with its legs hanging down. tirorotamai.

after having rested completely, he began to call out again. a wãshimi horua ha haikitaaruni, a komii kooma.

to rest completely, to have rested completely. haikitaaruni.

above all, do not come back visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

to adopt a perpendicular position to the ground; to reach the zenith (a star); to stand up. yororokei.

at dawn they left, each one on their own, to kill curassows (from the result I realized that) their harpoon-tipped arrows had not missed the target. paruri pe nape ha huomopotuheni, pe the pe no kroshokroshoprao henaopereshi.

repetition of the act (of killing with a harpoon-tipped arrow). kroshokroshoprao.

to be tight, pressed together. shãnini.

to slide down. nihoroãi.

to swell (belly); to reach the last stage of growth (banana). yahete.

he grabbed a liana (with which) he pulled the tree towards himself (pulling to make the trunk lean). thoo thotho ha yãkãreni, the itutua ahetea totihikema.

the jaguar attacked the hekura, grabbed one of them brusquely and tore it in two. irani hekura ke pe nape keo ha kuparuni, hekura ai a wai re yãkãreiwei, a re kakaprareiwei (cha.

to grab brusquely, to catch in mid-air. yãkããi.

to separate the legs, to have the legs open. wãkumi.

as Mount Maiyo was gradually submerging, the Yanomami gathered in small groups on the rock outcrops. maiyo keki he shototai ha, the poyoyootayope ha, yãnomãmi the pe thouhuotayoma.

to submerge food in water, to completely cover with water a food being cooked. he shototoamai.

to submerge gradually, to let vegetation overgrow. shototo.

to pull. pathemarei.

to make oneself dry. hãhimorayou.

to turn around for a moment. ãhemitou.

I was afraid and startled: extend the house completely, brother-in-law, build a large one. the auprariyoma: se pumaki yasuai totihikeyoruu, shori, the ta praukuku.

to extend, enlarge, widen. pumaki.

be content with being informed. a yimika nohi wãri thapou ta pera (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to make known, to inform. yimika thamai.

carry me on your back, I am gravely injured. yare ta yehireheriyo ya wãri waikou totihio ke a kuhe.

carry me on your back. yehireheriyo.

paint my face red with annatto dye. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint someone. momihiki.

to (that they do not want to offer). isikãi.

larger type of rajadora pava (mãrãshi). ashapa.

each time I lose my appetite. ya iyai mohitou si ihehewe.

lose. mohitou.

the butterflies were about to hit them on the snout. hurari peni pe hushi mori tuyea tikoaparemahe.

nose, snout. tikoaparemahe.

if Horonami did not exist, we would be miserable and hungry. horonami a yai kuo maoma, ohiri pemaki no peprarou shoaa.

you know well that I live in a place where there are no "Whites" (foreigners). nape pe perio maope ha ya peria ma re kure.

to not exist, to not be present. maoma.

to get oneself painted with hand prints. raokopramou.

she has a baby at the breast. oshe a yakapou.

the banana shoots are small. kuratha sipe oshe.

young, recent, new; baby. ã1.

in a place where water was heard flowing below him, from his feet, he pierced the earth with his arrow. e naha motu re u pata shararamou re pepianowei ha, hãto nahini u hiwehama.

to be below, to be under. pepia.

in such a way that its end is completely flat and smooth, like the large beetles of the simitori species do when they eat the branches of a tree. de manera tal que su extremidad quede totalmente plana y lisa, como lo hacen los grandes coleópteros de la especie simitori cuando carcomen las ramas de un árbol.

to make something flat and smooth at the end, like beetles do when eating branches. simitikei.

shelter for sleeping. kasiki*.

I said frankly several times that I opposed it. ya wã rea totihia waikia kure, ya wã wawetoaprarou waikia kure.

to say with complete frankness. wawetoaprarou.

the place where we used to go to get plantains is near. ãthe ahetepraa kurarei.

he lives near here. shapono a ahetewe ha ke kei.

near, close. ãthe.

scarlet macaw. mãrãkã.

to be clear, bright (the sky, the day). hirahawe.

object cut into several pieces with the teeth. wetima.

as I am a Waika, that tree standing there, I will split it open. waika ya kutaeni, hei hi re uprayahi, hi niya ha yakaroprani.

I will split it open. yakaroprani.

the inside of the canoe is slippery. kanawa a mi takre.

to become slippery (inside of an object). takrai.

he kept the malefic substance under his loincloth and hurried to prepare the small bamboo arrow (with which he had to shoot this substance). pena ke ki re hãkipouwei, yetu re masiki kopeprai re haitaray o w e i.

to carry something under the arm, to carry an object tucked between the skin and the loincloth; to keep an object pressed. hãkipouwei.

to solidify. solidi-.

1. To tangle (unidentified tree or animal) 2. (Botanical term for an unidentified tree, literally . shi wãrihi.

my daughter, the daughter of my brother (said by a man), the daughter of my sister (said by a woman). theeye.

Miel appeared. yãmonãmãriwe a petariyoma.

he fell and cried out in pain. a ha kerini, a rããmorayoma.

verb suffix indicating perfective aspect. riyo.

to be hungry. pashiomo.

to have left something to get covered in dust (by negligence). hekãhekãpimararei.

the mosquito reye gorged itself on blood. reye a pata makarayoma.

mosquito. reye.

to have defecated (perfective). thopohorayou.

if you irritate me, I will retrace my steps. wa no hushuai ha ya he tatorayou.

to turn back, to retrace one. tatorayou.

do not go to look at those pijiguaos (do not go to steal their fruits). hei rasha siki re kui, siki mitihehe.

to not touch, to not steal. fmi.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to plant (plants) spacing them out. shorororei.

to thicken, to become more concentrated. rue.

go get some water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

I scoop out the banana compote that is in the pot with a gourd. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

to extract, to remove using a utensil (gourd, ladle, spoon, fork, etc.). hikekei.

I'm sitting unevenly (lit. ya roa hieti-ai.

to fit poorly, insert imperfectly, close badly. hieti.

while they were digging them up, they were digging up the batatas. huko mo pe tiyepraihe tehe, huko mo pe mayepimow a p u.

to dig up, to unearth. mayepimow.

the night fell, he could not fall asleep. e the mi titirayoma, a shimakamou he haruma (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to fall asleep. hirimo.

to bend, twist the edge of a tool by hitting against an object that is too hard. koheãmai.

when the flood waters had not yet reached their highest level, the Yanomami passed (carried by the current) one after the other. motu ke u hayaroo shoao tehe, yãnomãmi the pe hayupraoma.

they passed (carried by the current). hayupraoma.

I take beads (I pick a part with my hand). tope ya ki mãoãi.

they caught a big turtle. totori pe pata mãoã shoareihe.

to take (with the hand), to grab, to pick, to extract with the hand a part of a whole (composed of divisible objects). mãoã.

to be afraid. kosiparinama.

first I caught the fish by harpooning them with an arrow, then I killed them with a machete. sherekani yuri ya pe tiwehai parioma, siparani ya pe tuyei mahioma.

then, next, later, finally. sherekani.

to separate for a moment. shekeretou.

it was because they had not desisted that they put themselves to groan one after the other. the pe tiraprai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiataroma.

they put themselves to groan one after the other. notiataroma.

sound that arrows make when falling. toumou.

plural object (of stretching cotton fibers into a crown shape). uturarei.

to get help. payerimamou.

to get help. payerimamou.

to stagger, to stumble from weakness. wekeke.

no crean que el culpable no es uno de nosotros (lit. the koo waikiokema ke tao, ya puhi kuma.

to put something in a position or state. taake.

(at the foot of the tree) the jaguar was roaring, its tail was contracting nervously. ira ke a misisiãmoma, pei shina yãtiyãtimokirioma (mit.

to contract rapidly several times (muscle). morãyo.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

the night demon was perched on a branch that was bent towards the ground. hii poko hithoreope ha titiri a rooma (mit.

to be curved, bent. hithoreawei.

he gathered all his muscles here (in the thigh), he did the same with the other leg. eyemi re the pe yãhiyãhi kokãprai, ai matha hami kãi.

to gather, to group, to assemble, to collect. kokããi.

to crash (of water). payuku.

to mix with people from another community or belonging to another people for a short time or just for a moment. pashikiprou.

I will tell (the Spider-monkey Spirit) to project its hairs on the path of the yawari (to dissuade them from coming). yawari ya pe mãyo he horoaiwe.

to smear one's hands with heri. fimiki he horomou.

a type of plant or substance. heri.

we went down to the River of Rains and went back upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

upstream. paruhuru.

to thicken a liquid, to make it slightly pasty; to soften, to make malleable. yãhihiãi.

to search for fish by feeling around in their hiding places. itahi hupai.

fish. itahi.

to heat food. yotamai.

(related word). he yaharoko.

they killed a large fat tapir near a lagoon. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe, wawewawe praope ha.

lagoon, pond, marsh. wawewawe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). wãwã.

to make a bamboo arrowhead too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakorokei.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short log. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to roll up a leaf into a cone shape. oshokoreãi.

to back up abruptly (to avoid something dangerous, for example a snake). tiruruprou.

to have become inferior (in height, length, duration, value); to have fallen behind, to have remained short of a limit. hawerayou.

to make scarce. esheshãkei.

the hekura dragged the korihiotomi trees and in some places these were left leaning. hekura peni korihiotomi nahi pe pata pakikamahe, nahi pe yotehepramoma.

during clearing, to cut several trees on the same side so that they fall with the fall of a larger tree. pakiamai.

to exercise a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, to break or grab. yãmoniãi.

Yoroporiwe went to visit him at his house. kama ke iha yoroporiwe e fama fuma.

to visit. fuma.

my niece, the daughter of my sister, the wife of my son. yuha.

to become pot-bellied, to become big-bellied. makasirayou.

I advance slowly, without making any branch creak. opisi re ya huu, ya krihimou mai ke the.

slowly. opisi.

he carried plantains hung from a vine on his back. kuratha a rukeka no yehipoma.

plantains or bananas hung from a vine. rukeka no.

the váquiros have straight and pointed ears. ware pe yimikaki hiyekewe.

a feline. uiro.

to tear off a portion of a round object by pulling with both hands in opposite directions. hihatho.

to fold the edge of something (perfective form of the incompletive verb). yapurekei.

(if I do that) I will get thorns stuck (in the flesh). ya misikipirariyo.

to get thorns stuck in the flesh. misikipirariyo.

to be smoothed, swept, scraped, shaved. hoã.

to do it with several fruits (durative). wãthemimai.

to catch the end of a fruit with the incisors and exert pressure to remove the seed from the shell. ãthemimai.

blanket. kopiha.

it is far upriver. the prahapohori.

far upriver. prahapohori.

don't eat alone in hiding. pe shihimou hãthoikuhe.

to eat alone; to go to a certain place to eat (animals). hihimo.

to be twisted locally, to be twisted only at one point. torokoa.

the (poisoned) dart was clumsily thrown when Lizard was moving along the trunk. refariwe ke a wãri harukuaprarou tehe, e masi yea re wãritipeheriiwei (mit.

1. To climb a tree by clinging to the trunk with both arms. 2. To surround, encircle; to acquire a circular mark.. haruku.

it's the last time you come, I told you frankly. tahiapi re wa huu, tahiapi re, wã ta wawetoa shoaiku.

to speak frankly (after having been evasive). wawetotou.

you have yellow urine. wa niaasi frãre.

yellow, yellowish, dirty yellow; to have a yellow (sickly) tint. frãre.

(he/she/it) interwove logs or pieces of wood to sit on. parithakei.

to interweave logs or pieces of wood to sit on (and isolate oneself from the ground). parithakei.

don't look at me eating this, don't let them see me eat so they don't get sick. ai he, ware maikaprarihe: no me miren comer, no ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

let. makekea.

he filled the hollow of the tree up to the brim with honey. hii ke hi ka ha puu u pe pata manikamama (mit.

1. To fill up to the brim. 2. To put, arrange, cut to the same size. manikiai.

to braid, to interweave fibers. irosi.

yono mosi: corn plant; Zea mays (Poaceae). yono mosi : bot. Pl. , planta de maíz; Zea mays (Poaceae). yono mosiki. Pl.

to make something warm, to reheat. yopramai.

cotton fibers. shinari uku.

hair; short feather or down; fiber. krepo.

to collect an object in order to give it. hokekei.

to sew locally, to perform a darn in a place. elina.

to become soft or deflated (as a consequence of a process or an act); to be partially soft, to be locally soft. ãsiã.

the one who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and deflowered her without waiting. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei.

leg, hind leg. hetur.

the day did not dawn and the ancestor was already awake. pe the mi harupraroimi totihiwe ha porepore a rãi ha kuparuni.

it does not dawn/it does not reach dawn. harupraroimi.

driguera. makeukeu.

the inside of the canoe is slippery. kanawa a mi takre.

to become slippery (inside of an object). takrai.

I pull the banana plant towards me (to knock it down and collect the bunch). kuratha ya siki iyoai.

You young people, go and tense your bows on the paths (= go and ambush on the edges of the paths, in case the enemies arrive). ihiru pe, pei yoka pe hami the ta iyoa ayaapotuhe.

1. Pull towards oneself, attract towards oneself by pulling. 2. Lift a hammock by tying it in the middle (to prevent someone from lying in it). 3. Tense a bow.. iyoai.

to become soft, to soften, to weaken, to lose strength. uhururu.

Don't insist on repeating that, that's what I'm saying. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

1. To not change one. wã he yati.

tree; Pourouma sp. (Cecropiaceae). yãokorema.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. presheshe.

having twisted many objects. ãihirãrei.

they had built the camp, and went to look for firewood taking the opposite direction to the one by which they had arrived. the pe peria waikikema, the pe thari thaa he torerayoma.

exceed (in quantity, in length), go beyond (a limit), leave behind. tore.

to insist, be stubborn. prakehe.

there is no brave elder man (= you are not brave). a wãri waitheri periami yai.

elder, important man. periami.

he had told him to be the messenger of the feast and they were waiting for him. a teshomopi ha nakareheni, e pe no taoma.

messenger. teshomomi.

he kept it in a cloth bag. sako hami the titipoma.

bag, sack, plastic bag. sako.

the fruit of the rerokotorawe akasihi tree. rerokotorawe akasi.

taxonomic classifier. akasihi.

the crested curassow's crest is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to be bristled (feathers or fur of an animal). mãririwe.

poling a boat forward using long poles. paihiprawe.

tú y yo vamos a vivir juntos. kamiye ke yafeki yaiprariyo.

Ponerse a vivir juntos (parientes que tienen una relación de mashi entre sí). yaiprou.

to cause to bend, curve or become sinuous (often referring to an arrow). ethethamai.

the moon disappeared behind the clouds. ihirashi pe ha peripo a he shãhokema.

to hide an object behind another, to disguise, to conceal by interposing something. shãhokei.

I glanced. ya mipraai.

to do something for a very short time. mipraahe.

to doze, to nap. tharehe.

visitors intensify the pain by trampling the ground. the pe nini kashuuhe.

pain that intensifies. kashuuhe.

to succeed someone in an activity, to replace someone, to take over from someone. notirayou.

come mother. hore wape.

mother. wape.

she has a baby at the breast. oshe a yakapou.

the banana shoots are small. kuratha sipe oshe.

young, recent, new; baby. ã1.

the blood vengeance was fulfilled. e naha re a shereka shetekewe kua waikipema.

it was fulfilled (the blood vengeance). waikipema.

picure. yorehi.

we dispersed through the jungle (and saw), in the middle of the group we formed, that the foliage was moving where the others were passing. yamaki mi ha yoikuni, pei ke yamaki mi thari ha ai ke pe the pe re hishihishipraroperei.

to advance making the foliage move. hishihishiprar.

the sky clears up again. the heão koã.

to clear up after the rain (the sky). heão.

he/she is dead. a waiyorayoma.

1. To have a hammock in very bad condition. 2. To carry a very heavy load and not be able to move fast. 3. To be dying.. waiyou.

a short time. momención.

my older brother without doubt observed a flying guan, he shot his arrow. ãiwe ke a wãrini mãrãshi a norãmi yei taa ha ayararini, a niyaprarema.

without doubt. ayararini.

to pass and return. weyoyoweyoyomou.

He/she does not exist and also it can be The word 'peti' in Yanomami means 'black fly, simuliid'. Peti amo.

It is found mainly upstream in watercourses and mountainous regions. Se lo encuentra sobre todo río arriba en los cursos de agua y en las regiones montañosas.

to fill. peti.

to cover one. oromashimou.

the curiara is in the middle of the river. kanawa mi ãmo hami a kãtayoa.

is located. kãtayoa.

the meat is on the trough without fire (and risks spoiling). wahari hami the yaro makea.

to manifest (the coolness that precedes daybreak). wahariai.

to tie quickly. okãokãi.

a dispersal (of people, of communities). peindica.

to have the chest painted with an ocher or red background on which sinuous lines have been traced with the nails. foni pariki si tikekewe.

to draw lines around the mouth. fkahiki tikeke.

to draw lines on the chest. fpariki tikeke.

to trace sinuous lines with the nails. tikeke.

we arrived at the place where they habitually come to hunt. the pe re heniomopraaiwehei ha yamaki warokema.

the place where they habitually come to hunt. heniomopraaiwehei.

I will make a cotton ball and bring it, you will ask for it. ya nathe fa thaprarini, ya nathe kãi fa yaﬁrini, wa nakouwe.

cotton ball. yaﬁrini.

we will gather the leaves, each one on their side, we will spread them out again (to make our tracks disappear). hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope.

he piled up firewood. koã ãsho yototamama.

to be gathered in several groups. yototoprawe.

the stream whose depth has decreased greatly. u wiririwe.

stream whose depth has decreased greatly during the dry season. wiririwe.

makayari: maleficent beings related to piles of rocks, they take possession of the soul of human beings. makayari: seres maléficos relacionados con los cúmulos de rocas, se apoderan del pei mi ãmo de los seres humanos.

maleficent beings related to piles of rocks, they take possession of the soul of human beings. makayari.

to make sick. haririmarei.

to become frayed or unraveled. thauweshiprou.

ve a buscar mi plumón blanco. horoiye ke pe kãi.

plumón blanco. horoiye.

he is a son: my younger brother has engendered him. hei ihiruye ke a, hei aiyeni ke a tararema.

my younger brother (or younger male cousin of the same sex). osheye.

"while they roll down here, I will kill them". "eyeha ke pe wãri kahehou tehe ya pe waikai totihiowe".

while they roll down the slope. totihiowe.

(he) moves his hand from right to left with spread fingers, to indicate that what is being looked for has not been found. imiki yãweyãwemou.

to move from right to left a raised hand with spread fingers, to indicate to someone that what they are looking for has not been found. yãweyãwemou.

to be almost extinguished. wãnonoã.

he imitates his father (= he behaves like his father). pe hii a owepou.

to imitate someone (constantly), to act like a certain person, to resemble. owepou.

let it approach (an animal). ya wã tisuamai ma kui pe the taproimi tharei: de a h e t e a m a i.

I bring it closer. ya the ahetamai.

to approach, to get close. ahetamai.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani.

they shook several fruitless branches. ripukupiatarani.

mother-in-law, I am thirsty. yape, ya amishi: suegra, tengo sed.

(in a myth): he carried in his arms a small, wrinkled, hungry cachicamo. opo si ãikiwe ke a wai amishiri yakarema (mit.

thirst. amishi.

descended vertically (perfective, plural object). wahohorariyo.

to have gotten a blister on the hand. yotihiprariyoma.

in the places where Nosiriwe had spat, tobacco plants began to sprout spontaneously. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to occur spontaneously, to happen as a consequence. yauaherima.

to be painted with oni haheti wavy or sinuous lines. foni eyekewe.

wavy, sinuous (lines). haheti.

my sons-in-law offered me pieces of ice. siyoyahe the peni preyura repe kãi re hiyorariyowei.

they offered me. hiyorariyowei.

to be getting oneself painted with a curved line going from one ear to the other across the forehead. tiwaromou.

to speak. mi yãhu.

not long ago they came to widen the entrance of the den of the baba. iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

to start widening the entrance of a den. tishiprai.

root of a tree. hii hi nasiki.

the largest plantains in the bunch, located at the end opposite the flower. kuratha ke nasiki.

root. nasiki.

Woman-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

to compress, to place one object on top of another to keep it in place. patetekei.

they had hung their hammocks outdoors. hakokopramorayou.

to have become, to have been, or to be flat at one point and nowhere else. tatahaa.

progresamos lentamente río abajo, unos después de otros. yamaki opi re hirihipekiriowei.

slowly. hirihou.

next to, parallel to. poahami.

immediately. hei tehe shoawe.

sit immediately in the canoe. kanawa a hami wamaki komi tikekea ha shoaparuni.

don't run away immediately. rerei shoatou mai.

father-in-law, put your axe on your shoulders immediately (= take your axe immediately). shoape, hãyokoma a ta rukea shoawe.

to do immediately, to do without waiting, to do quickly, to do together, to do at the same time. shoatou.

to start sharpening bamboo tips. hiroroprai.

Jaguar quedó rezagado, y llegó debilitado por el hambre. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

debilitated by hunger. heokirioma.

to be folded or rolled up once, to be partially rolled up. wapure.

to grow (a human being, an animal). yawei.

what a thick penis that was. wai ta preonowe.

to be thick or dense (like flour). onawe.

a wasp stung me. kopinani yare tikarema.

a mosquito stung me. ukushini yare tikarema.

stung. tikarema.

the woman responds easily to the advances of men. suwe a noshi ihite.

to respond easily to the solicitations of men; to let oneself be taken without crying or shouting by people other than one. noshi ihite.

to have multiple dizzy spells. mi pe shiwãrihou.

to have multiple dizzy spells. shiwãrihou.

unravel your fishing line, and catch the fish there. wa ãsitha ha kushereni, kihi waho ki re titirati, ki ta shaire.

to unravel, to unwind. yaipahawe.

to become short, to shorten something. homoto.

the vine forms a hook along its entire length. thoo thotho ishakowe.

to form a hook with the entire length of something. ishakowe.

to give or take in small quantity, to diminish, to become small. wãisipimai.

term.. ushuhuprou.

if you sleep without fire, you will get elephantiasis in the testicles. wa ruwemou tehe wa natheki wakapirayou.

elephantiasis in the testicles. wakapi.

tomorrow morning we will descend (from the mountain). henaha pemaki yohoo henaokiriope.

to descend, to go down. yohoo.

to acquire thickness, density or volume. supra.

to offer someone two objects at once. heruruai.

to be smoothed, swept, scraped, shaved. hoã.

her husband was going to be stunned when he arrived. pe heãropi ke e ãmoku keprohorope.

to be stunned/stupefied. keprohorope.

I don. koyotohima.

I filled their lungs with water and drowned them (the hekura), aren't they floating. mãu re u ha ya mishi kãi ha tuparuni ya pe mishi ha tumaparini, pe karorowe ma kui (cha.

to drown, to fill the lungs with water. tuparuni.

to have diarrhea repeatedly. kriimou.

grew (plural object). patarariyo.

to remain lying in a hammock with someone or something for a long time. yakatao.

the sun declinaba when he arrived at his house. mothoka kaiprou tehe a koã kopema.

to incline abruptly. kaiprakei.

we climb the pijiguao palms to collect their fruits. rasha yama ki hirirãi.

to climb a spiny trunk using two crossed poles tied with vines. hiririkei.

the chiggers (nested in the toes) make him walk on his heels. hihu napeni a mamiki kayetimou.

heels. napeni.

He provoked the wind to blow. pei maki no yaripi ma rororomou.

The Waika went to war. waika pe wayu fa aruf erini.

to provoke, irritate, bother; to scream in pain; to travel collectively as shamans to attack enemies; to prepare a substance to make it effective; to give birth with pain (believed to make the child brave). wayu.

to decorate with handprints. pãrishãpi.

filled up to the brim (a basket). iyekeprou.

to wave in front of oneself, while advancing, a handful of leafy branches, as if sweeping the floor, to reintegrate the noreshi of a sick person. yãhãromai.

he went to inform the people of his community what he had heard. kama theri pe rii hami a nowã weohoroma.

he went to inform/tell the people of his community what he had heard. weohoroma.

to retrace the path one after the other. tatopraai.

upriver (speaking of upriver). kai ãsho (habla de río arriba.

upriver. ãsho.

Trocitos de madera sobre los que se coloca el fuego para encenderlo cuando el suelo está mojado. wãnapo.

to make several knots on multiple objects. moshokoremai.

(plural subject). huprou.

very deep place of a river where fish seek refuge during the dry season, when the water level is very low. fyuri ke ki mathopi.

deep place. mathopi.

you will call us cowards unjustly. kamiye wamare he hore yathepe.

to feel sick, to treat someone as a coward. yathe.

when the celestial disk broke, the ancestors ran to take refuge in the cacao trees and also it can be The word 'tu' in Yanomami means 'doctor'. tu misi keprou tehe pohoroa ana hiki upraope ha poreri ke pe re pririkeiwei.

when. tu.

he still had the glans uncovered (in the woman's sex), it was like a hook stuck in the fleshy mouth of a guabina fish. the moka wãri wakataatima, hawe ishawaritomi uhea a weipou kuo totihioma.

having the glans of the penis uncovered. wakataatima.

it is nothing but a guache fox skin, however its head (upper end) has a nice groove. yarushe pei si ma kui wa si he pata yakatowe ta toprapariyohani.

to divide a rounded object into two equal parts by making a groove or incision on its upper part. yakatoai.

apártate un momento. a ta prahataru.

apártate un momento. prahataru.

to become dense (vegetation), to become impenetrable. rasisai.

I was stung by a twenty-four without realizing it. shihoni ware the tikai totihionoma.

stung. tikai.

the day soon returned to how it was before. the mi uhehetou mi yaparayoma.

1. To begin to, 2. To widen the upper part of a container; to open the edges of a canoe or vessel. uheheãi.

to cut one's own hair. miki peyemou.

to cut someone. peyema.

to feel headaches after walking a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe.

to vibrate, to experience small shakes; to sway. tirikai.

I will prepare a tobacco quid for him. pee ya nahe humikei.

to prepare a tobacco quid to offer it. humikei.

the noise suddenly became very loud. wã hirekeprou.

to suddenly become very loud (noise). hirekeprou.

object agitated by the current, whose end emerges at regular intervals out of the water. shoroshoromou.

Have all finished painting themselves. wamaki yãmoã ta hititiraruhawe.

to paint oneself. yãmorãyou.

to make a circular motion with the arms; to stir a liquid in that way; to draw a circle (durative). yaporemai.

to tear a strip for oneself. makokorei.

to clash arrows against each other; to strike the flat part of an instrument against something (to make noise), to strike with the palm of the hand. paisiai.

in the places where a stream of water runs over the emerging rocks, that is where one must start to drink again (after initiation). pei masi ha u wai yoãyoãmope ha wa u wai hapa koarei (cha.

murmuring water. yotãyotãmo.

the centipedes persisted in biting the Waika people. suri ke peni waika pe nini waiamaihe (mit.

they tell us (two people) not to return. pehereki nohi waiaprai.

1. To persist; to pursue. 2. To refuse, to prohibit. 3. To choose a victim (human or animal predator).. waiamaihe.

Kãrãnãri will make you fall. kãrãnãrini wa kemarei.

Supernatural being of the yai the class; kicks those who climb trees and makes them fall. Kãrãnãri.

they are lazy. kama pe mohi.

they are bad. kama pe wãritiwe.

they have worked in the field. kama pe hikarimoma.

they, them. kama pe.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to receive or have someone give you a part of another person. hakopei.

headdress of the hekura that resembles a burning ember. watoshe puritoa.

when all of them had resurrected, they got up quickly. the pe horiã ha hititiraruni, the pe hoketama.

to get up quickly, to rise up quickly. hoketama.

the pain was twisting in my stomach. pei ya shithema ha the wayu kãi pata hithoreai re kupariyowei.

to curve, to bend. ithoreprou.

bunch of bananas from a shoot (and not from the main plant). kohorã ke ki.

banana shoot or sucker. kohorã.

to be angry. prakehai.

he was transporting a bunch of seje palm fruits on his back. hoko a yehipoherima.

tomorrow I will cut a pijiguao palm, and on the way I will make a club (with it). henaha rasha ya si tuyei, himo ke ya thapraheripe.

to transport or carry something while moving. yehipoherima.

(the pijiguao palms). ikreherayou.

osamenta del ala de un ave; conjunto de esos huesos: húmero, radio, cúbito, carpio, metacarpio y falange. hãtãtãmãpi.

to be always accompanying someone. nosi yauaprarou.

to be always accompanying someone in their movements. yauaprarou.

to be habitually prohibited. ãyotamai.

sit (at the foot of the tree, where the speaker is perched). a ta rotho.

sit (at the foot of a tree, where the speaker is perched). rotho.

to crumble, to collapse (perfective form). hashishirei.

I have the sensation of biting a bait several times in a row (like catfish do when they bite the bait). yahatoto hami seguidas (como lo hacen los bagres cuando rasha pe no ikrekerayopi.

to pull slightly several times from its trunk. ikrekerayou.

small dome formed by earthworm excrement on the surface of the earth. kahakohihipi.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall seriously ill. parohou.

to be about to make an object with one side higher than the other. wereheprou.

"she will not simply be deceiving me" (he) said to himself. "ware hore mirãmãi peo ma ta thawe", a wãri re kutariyowei.

to deceive someone, to make someone have illusions, to promise someone something and not fulfill it. mirãmai.

they cured each other, then they got better. the pe nohi re reayouwei, the matha waiprapei.

to cure each other (shamans). nohi reayou.

introduce by force. kirirãi.

He/she speaks the upstream dialect. Ofe theri.

upstream (speech). ofe.

al que ladra, colócalo alrededor de mi cuello (= dame un perro). hei a re houhoumouwei, pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari.

to shout while chasing. houhoumou.

hammock that has one end higher than the other. nonohowe.

to be happy. sheshehe.

los niños se trepaban a los árboles (con argollas colocadas alrededor de los tobillos). hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei.

a su vez, Pájaro carpintero trepó enseguida. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit.

to roll, to make roll. pruru.

I found (and collected) a knife. sipara si ya hokerema.

they (two) found a cooked and twisted caterpillar on the ground and collected it. kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepireiwei.

to find, to gather, to collect. kepi.

he was not aware at all of what was happening and thought he was at home. a puhi hatukewemi ma kui, hawe kama theri pe rihami a huu kuo petaoma.

to be aware, to realize lucidly a situation. puhi hatukewe.

path opened by pushing aside vegetation with the foot. kakea.

spinal column. humothoku.

they are always directing their guns against us: let them shoot then, it doesn't matter. kopeta a shiro hore puhuraihe ha, niyaai poohe.

they are directing (something long like an arrow or gun) against someone. puhuraihe.

To begin to. uhehe.

to have started to surpass (in height). toreherayou.

on the other side (of the hill or mountain). lofai the tiwaro ha.

on the other side (of a hill or mountain). lofai.

to arrange the firewood tightly around the central fire. koã ãshoku titetepei.

to arrange the firewood tightly around the central fire. titetepei.

to be red/reddish in color. momihiwe.

will he start to smile finally. pe kasi watea ke a ta kuhani.

to smile. watea.

ramas laterales de los árboles, las que están inclinadas hacia el suelo, tienen frutas momo oshe pe ma kui riha. weteteawei.

tortoise; Platemys platycephala (Chelidae). preshetomi.

fruits. rtivamenfrutos.

asociado al mono capuchino. hayariwishariwe.

to become clear, limpid, translucent. ferushi.

the cave of Yotenama had a strange smell of a wild beast. yotenama ke theka ni pata yaithapi ni huthethewe yaiwe.

to have a strong, dense smell of a wild beast. huthethewe.

it is said of an animal that lives in Bot. koteke koweteroma nasihi.

an unidentified animal or plant. koteke.

and if I went hunting on my own (without the others). ya ta rãmi huu ayao sho.

the parrot had started talking (on its own) at the moment when the gallineta took flight. kurikaya ke a wã wãri haa re ayarayonowei, hãshimo a hokeprou tehe (mit.

to walk on one. aya.

the women will contemplate the gourd necks adorned with white down (= we will carry out the blood revenge and the women will see the funerary gourds). suwe ke pe wãrini shokatama ke kahiki horoi mi totihiopehe.

the women will contemplate the gourd necks adorned with white down (= we will carry out the blood revenge and the women will see the funerary gourds). totihiopehe.

to invite. shoa.

to heat up, to reheat; to rise, to get up. yotaai.

I will not separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I will go downstream to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

sounds made by metallic objects clashing against each other, especially pots when carrying them; clashes produced by poles when dragging several at once on the ground. teeteemorãyou.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted with a light reddish-yellow tint. yãmonãmãritawe a petariyoma, a oni frãihiwe totihitawe (mit.

to have the body painted with a light reddish-yellow tint. frãihiwe.

to put oneself underneath something, to go underneath. pepiai.

"you missed your shots at them (downstream)", I thought. "wama pe posi hore wãri re waaprapiyekiri", ya puhi kuma.

downstream, there where the rock is, that's where they usually go to fish for big fish. hei ma re ithãã totihipiyekiri ha, iha yuri pata yokepraaihe.

to be located elsewhere, downstream. piyekiri.

I plant the cambur plants spacing them out. kuratha ya siki tiai shororoai.

to plant (plants) spacing them out. shorororei.

supernatural being. puriwatoriwe.

dominated by anger, I want to leave this dwelling. ãyuwã ke the pe wayu ha.

anger. ãyuwã.

since you have wives, lie down in the hammocks and make love together. wamaki wãri suwepi kuprawe ke, wamaki ha yakapraoni, pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

1. Make love to each other. 2. Touch each other. yãhãhemayo.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

they. shee.

my son, go collect wapu fruits by striking the branches with a stick. pusi, wapu ke ki wai ta yayopra.

to collect fruits by striking branches with a stick to make them fall, to dislodge an arrow stuck in branches by throwing sticks at it, to notch the end of a piece of wood to split it by striking it against the ground. yayoai.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to start forming bubbles. poririprou.

he painted ugly circles on his body in a hurry. wãritiwe a oni pata roherohemoma.

he painted ugly circles on his body in a hurry. roherohemoma.

(synonym of yaporeai). yaproko.

it took us a long time to reach the top of the hill or mountain, when we reached the top, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

it took us a long time to reach the top of the hill or mountain. poushukuprarutuni.

it moved along the curved part of the tree. hi re hithoreawei hami a kuaaherima.

to be bent, curved, inclined. hithorea.

numerous racimos of pijiguaos were hanging. yahatoto hami rasha pe nadejo ithãthãmoma.

hanging in large numbers. ithãthãmoma.

ése de la comunidad de Horetoi cuya piel está cubierta de manchas blancas se propone venir a atacarme por medio de hechizos. horetoi theri a pata re turuweini ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei.

a community name. Horetoi.

You all have stolen objects. matohi wama pe toreramai kuhe.

1. To make roll (a round object), 2. To steal, to take away (several objects). toreramai.

(it) erodes, crumbles gradually. washishiai.

to erode, crumble gradually. washishi.

to prefer, to choose, to aim preferentially at one thing instead of another. yaimai.

maleficent supernatural beings associated with the forest. urihiri.

maleficent supernatural beings associated with the forest. urihiri.

to be sick. kutu.

that's what your deer wanted to tell you. ei naha hayahe ke a niya kuma.

deer. hayahe.

it had become silent, it had become silent. kahiki* eemoimi, yãno* emoimi.

to be silent. yãno*.

you will make love many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already made love. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

to make love. toape.

as we do not have a shotgun to hunt, I will kill you with my arrows in turn; upstream speech. fei ya ki re ithãpore, kopeta re ya thapou pashia ha marani, ihi a ma kuini pe wãri prapou mi fetuo ta totihio.

upstream. ithãpore.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain-spirit shakes the ends of the roof poles of the house. ei maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

keep your bow armed. nahi ta iyopou.

my son-in-law. fipa nahi.

certain objects derived from trees (the bow, posts and poles used to build the house, the house itself or a camp in the forest). maariweni.

I will also scratch you repeatedly. pe si hukekea mi hetur a r e i.

to scratch repeatedly. hukekay.

is not that one who lives at the foot of Mount Mãroha, the one who killed my relative. kihi mãroha siki pepi ha, ei a re peripe, ihi a ma kuini, ipa wa naki tea perei ma ta kuhawe.

mountain. mãroha.

the tobacco is becoming moldy. pee nahe rohorai.

to have become moldy (perfective). rohororayou.

what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me. kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by pulling with the hand, exerting lateral pressure). hoyorei.

they built the scaffolding around the rock. the ki mathakari rereamai shokei yaioherimahe.

some had already placed the poles that support the lower part of the house. ai peni hãto ke nahi shikã rereamai waikiomahe.

to place horizontally (long objects), to draw a horizontal line. rereamai.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while observing the surroundings (when an attack is feared). kohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; for birds: bone set comprising the pubis and ilium. yãpreke.

errar un blanco varias veces seguidas. simataa.

to make loud love (said by a man). sokãsokãmou.

he made pieces of vine jump with his nails. pei ke imisikini e thoku hematha yutuataramai kupariyoma (mit.

the cat retracts its claws. mishi imisiki kushesheaprarai.

fingernail; toenail of a front paw; flight feather. fimisiki.

that which is heard is the beating of a hummingbird's wings. tesho hakora siki horã.

feathers that are found under the wing (more specifically: white feathers that are found on the underside of the razor-billed curassow; these feathers are used in male ornamentation). fakora.

to imitate the cry of an animal to attract it; to call someone by whistling. hoshomi.

supernatural beings of the yai the class that inhabit the lower world, the hetu misi suwe pata. horemari.

sole of the foot. pariki mamiki.

plant. pariki.

to fire a shotgun shot (neologism). thoomou.

do not gather (do not group together). pe tishoshatihe.

a great quantity of termites swarmed in the water. mãuuhami komi konaki tishoshama.

to gather and form a compact group. tishoshai.

he shot at an object used for a specific purpose. miha niyãkini shereka a hãkema: le disparó a un pajaepenaye.

an object used for a specific purpose. pajaepenaye.

southern Orinoco dialect. yemota shi.

to have a part of the face painted with dots. tipikia.

to partially roll up, to fold once the edge of an object. wapure.

hekura that transmigrates. hekura fuehaprapi.

that transmigrates. fuehaprapi.

tomorrow I will go downriver to search for something to eat in the forest. henaha ya ni thaohorayou.

to go downriver to search for food in the forest. thaohorayou.

they killed animals of the hunt. posheye ke a ta niyaprahe.

they killed. posheye.

supernatural cannibalistic beings that live in this region (the sky). hetu misiri, hetu misiriwe: seres sobrenaturales caníbales que viven en esta región (el cielo).

supernatural cannibalistic beings. hetu misiriwe.

to leave a part of something for someone; to leave a rest, not to eat everything, not to give everything. taiw.

we regrouped and slid down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

it made the tragavenado fall dead into the water. mã u re u ha hokoto keki pata nomawe nihoroã shoamaparema.

to slide down an incline, to slide into water from the bank; to dive in. nihoroo.

(see related forms). porepore.

within a moment the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky), he said. waiha, iha mothoka yahatotoprope, a re kuuwei.

the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky). yahatotoprope.

to have the lymph node in the groin swollen. moshipepiai.

when the woman's belly exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to cut the end of a long object (by sliding a tool back and forth or applying blows from above). tipuru.

1. To place (something) directly on the fire (without hanging it). 2. To put a sprout back in its place after having extracted the roots or tubers (ocumo or cassava). tirere.

paipaimi: male paují bird, it is called that because of its cry (onomatopoeic). paipaimi: paují macho, se lo llama así por su grito (onom.

male paují bird. paipaimi.

there are flashes of lightning. the mi yãmimou.

there were flashes of lightning (perfective). yãmimorãyou.

(he/she) worked in the conucos. hikarimomarei.

perfective form. momari.

fruits of the kãrã ãshi tree. kape kãrã ãshi kãrã ãshi.

to produce whirlpools in the water with one. kape.

to have been extended. katia.

gallineta. fãshimo.

(he/she/it) got stuck on the bottom. shi wãripariyo.

to get stuck or caught on the bottom (usually referring to a fishing hook). wãripariyo.

to arm the bow to shoot an arrow. shereka maketai.

to introduce an arrow into the bowstring to shoot it. pehi makeprai o pehi maketai.

to arm the bow to shoot an arrow. maketai.

when the great fire was burning producing vigorous flames, Siroromi appeared. wake pata waowaomou tehe siroromi a petariyoma.

to burn producing tall and vigorous flames. waowaomou.

they hung. hehãprawe.

he let his saliva drip, and then sucked it back up. kama kahu upe ukurayoma.

to let saliva drip and then suck it back up before it falls (a game played by young people under the influence of hallucinogens). ukukurayou.

chipped, nicked. wetusi.

ya reconocí la planta de los y a w a r i. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena no ihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a no ihipia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo no ihipia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. ihipia.

I spoke with those who live mixed with us, coming from another community. heha, ai pe re koyokaiwei, ya pe nowã thaa shoarei kurei.

people from another community. koyokai.

the large carrying basket is gray like the earth. wii ke a pata mimou koshi.

gray, earth-colored, stained with earth. kroshi.

a recently initiated shaman's arrow. porepore ke pe re hirapiyei hami yãnora.

arrow. hirapiyei.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

to grow a little, to begin to grow. preãkãi.

edible fruit of the shãpre uhi tree. shãpu.

the colorant was mixed with bark to perfume it, that's why it's brilliant. fei nana pe e no kapino, e no kapino fa totiﬁoni, ei re e noshi tererewe.

brilliant, shining, resplendent. tererewe.

they (two) have killed each other. kama ke kipi shepirema.

they have killed each other. shepirema.

I presume I will suffer from stomach pains again. ya ãmoku no ninimou kokepi.

to have persistent stomach pains, to suffer from stomach pains regularly. ninimorayou.

It turns into the shoroshoro ãhi tree (Cecropiaceae). shoroshoro ãhiki.

edible fruits of the shoroshoro ãhi tree. shoroshoro ãhi.

he went upstream, and then entered the stream. hi a pe he kãi wãri orahatohorayou tehe a ithoai kupariyoma.

he went upstream. orahatohorayou.

stop threatening all the time (= stop threatening). a wã tetea he yatiparuhe.

although he said he wouldn't do it, he took out his teeth. maa a ma kuu tehe, naki hoyoa he yatikema (mit.

to insist on doing something, to keep doing something despite being told not to. yatiparuhe.

his/her pet. pe himapi.

it was a big dog, a good hunter. hiima ke a pata suhirina kuoma.

the shaman had a tortoise as a pet. shaporini poshotomi ke a hiima thapoma.

his/her pet, his/her dog. himapi.

I am hot. Ya wakehe.

to be hot, to have heat. wakehe.

enrollar en ovillo el algodón hilado. shinari u yãyoko.

the women were the first to leave, one after the other, bringing food. suwe pe koo parioma, the pe nii kãi koprããi yaioma (mit.

to return bringing something. koprããi.

to get up from the hammock to offer something to someone. ithoalguien.

the older ones grabbed axes. prowehewe peni hãyokoma pe teararemahe.

they grabbed axes. teararemahe.

I will get myself painted with lines if they want. ãiwe ke iha ya oni eyekamou.

to get oneself painted with lines. eyekamou.

I soak the wapu fruits. wapu ya ki he paoai.

to soak, to submerge repeatedly. paotaai.

noise of a metallic object when struck by a hard object. tããmou.

to be crushed. nahihi.

Zorro guapán (gritó): "¡silencio. hoarifanariwe ke a wãrini: "hai. el parloteo de ustedes es detestable". wamaki ã wã hirimou wãri".

Zorro guapán. hoarifanariwe.

When the others were absent, she found a twisted (by cooking) caterpillar and, when everyone returned, she approached to show it. kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni, the pe komi ha koponi kasha a mima mi paoma.

to become deformed, hardened, twisted, wrinkled. toshesheai.

what can be eaten by biting or scraping with the incisors. wãkekãmou.

to be in the last position (during a collective journey through the jungle). shiokaprou.

to order tobacco leaves one on top of the other to then form them into a ball that is placed inside a closed basket in the indicated way. ithorimai.

to close a basket by passing a loop from one edge to the other over the contents. ithoriãi.

I met them at the moment when they were plucking a crane. ya waroakirioma, yãpi pe mi haihe tehe.

to pluck a bird, to remove hair from an animal before cooking. mi hai.

I only take a dose of the yopo hallucinogen. hisiomi ya ki ayaai.

I collect only a part of the fruits. himohimo ya ki a y a a i.

to take only a part of something; to collect a part of something and save the rest for later; to consume something, or to collect the fruits of a tree, partially. ayaamai.

to be grooved or channeled circularly by natural causes. yawete.

in an irregular manner. parereprou.

the hekura associated with the spider monkey project their hairs onto the shamans (enemies), to cause them itching. hãhoriwe peni hekura pe he horouhe, pe niya ha shihitiamaheni.

a type of spider whose hairs cause severe itching; shamans embody it to repel their enemies during battles. hãhãrãmãema.

Danta went to place itself on a thick divided branch. hiki hãkãrãpi pata kuope ha shamariwe ke a pata tikepareheroma (mit.

went to place itself. tikepareheroma.

to paint on someone. yakirai.

amontonen las hojas, ¡nosotros las esparciremos de nuevo. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

conservar esparcido, extendido. patheripou.

to cut with the hand the branches covered with leaves that close the exit of a dwelling. fpeki thaki yãprãi.

to cut with the hand the branches covered with leaves that close the exit of a dwelling. yãprãi.

did something to take the contents for oneself (plural object). oshokorerãrei.

(he/she/it) kills. she-i.

to kill. matar.

to have felt bad. thareherariyo.

the fire descended rolling rapidly along the rock. pei maki pata wake nihorãi ha kuparuni.

to slide down, roll down, descend rapidly. nihorãi.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short log. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokoremai.

don't eat the prosi siki snake, it causes dreams (about absent people, the dead). prosi siki watihe, ki no thapipi.

something that causes a dream. thapipi.

to leave leftovers. sheeamai.

that is opening. uriara.

to fluidify, make less dense (durative, plural object). hereshimai.

they went when it dawned. tehe mi ukekou pe hurayoma.

they went. ukekeprou.

he moved away quickly, he moved rapidly. rurayoherii.

it is narrow (it is too narrow for me to insert it). the hoki.

narrow, too narrow (with respect to an object that one wants to insert). hoki.

(at the foot of the tree) the jaguar was roaring, its tail was contracting nervously. ira ke a misisiãmoma, pei shina yãtiyãtimokirioma (mit.

to contract rapidly several times (muscle). morãyo.

the leaves of the wakata tree scream like spider monkeys. wakata henaki re pashomorãkiri.

to imitate the behavior of the spider monkey to cure a person whose vital image is that animal; to imitate the shrill cry of the spider monkey during an attack or to receive guests. noreshimou.

to become extremely thin (due to illness or magic). heheteprou.

(he/she) hung the ripe plantains. kuratha ke ki wake re yaumakeiwei.

to hang, to suspend. auamai.

they did not think of ambushing on the plain at dusk. weyate, heyari ha yamaki ha ta yereiku, the pe kuu mai.

I arrived at dusk and slept. weyate re ya ha koponi ya mioma.

evening, dusk. weyate.

to heal, to cure. temiprou.

to be scattered on the ground in large quantities (wild fruits). pororowe.

to get bruised (in general). wãokoãi.

to put oneself in a position to continue something. tikeprai.

the sugarcane of the yawari species is found far from here. puu yawari u siki pata upraa he re yathehepe ye.

to be far away, to be at a great distance. yathehea.

by means of what. weti ke theni.

by means of what, through what. theni.

we gathered yagua fruits that we ate. yei yama ki ha hukani yama ki wama.

past declarative. hukani.

flower. honokore.

I am the Spider-spirit hanging upside down (on the web). hãhãrãmãethawe ya ihohoa kuyahi (cha.

He came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi (mit.

spider. kuyahi.

What is said to lie on the ground, by the water downstream. weti ke the hoã praa kupokiri.

downstream, downriver. pokiri.

paipaimou: the way the male paují bird cries. paipaimou: pakataorewe forma de gritar del paují macho.

to cry like a male paují bird. paipaimou.

imitate Rashakami. rashakami a ta oweprari.

he imitates his father (= he behaves like his father). pe hii a owepou.

to imitate, to act like. oweprari.

1. To cook directly over the fire (without hanging). 2. To replace a shoot after having extracted the roots or tubers (ocumo or cassava). tirerea.

I leave the child in custody. ihiru ya heamai.

1. To leave someone in custody of an object, to entrust a child to someone. heamai.

to find a place again without hesitation. katitipraai.

to accompany, to follow a person. nosi yukei.

wait for fruits to ripen before picking or eating them. wãkirei.

bríndale ocumo a tu esposo. feãrohe ke iha oﬁna ke moku ta hipeki.

ocumo. feãrohe.

1. To bend, to fold (the edge or tip of a tool). 2. To draw up the legs, to draw up the legs in front of the genitals, out of modesty, when sitting on the ground (a woman). 3. To bend, to fold (once on itself) the edge of something, to make a hem on a fabric.. koheãi.

the ancestors did not get down (from their hammocks) because they were afraid of him. poreri pe ithopronomi pe ha kirini.

they did not get down (from their hammocks). ithopronomi.

but they made it (the tree) grow very tall. kihami re hi tiremapi kuaai re shoakeiwei.

to make grow (plural objects). tiremai.

pile up the dry tobacco leaves and then roll them into a ball to preserve them. pee nahe shi wãrihiprai.

to tangle, to roll up. shi wãrihiãmai.

to be trading partners. thapoyou.

declared. thareiwei.

I will make you cry (by killing one of your relatives). ya pe hushihipi hoyamaiwe.

to cry for a dead person (lit.: to throw snot). hushiripi.

fly eggs, especially on meat. mothemothe.

if you move in this way (making so much noise) the humans will hear you and shoot arrows at you. minaha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

in this way, in this manner. hirireihe.

desaparezcan inmediatamente. pe ta mratou shoaro.

destruye esto ahora. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

immediately. shoaro.

I hit to collect honey tima, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to have opened a hollow object, to have opened a hollow trunk. pawehekei.

it seems they want to attack me at all costs and I am still waiting for them. ware niya hoã shurukai he yatiprouhe ha ya pe no ma re tapou shoai.

to be in a state of waiting (many people in different places). taprawe.

(ustedes dos) coman carne de danta. shama ke yãhi ta wapiri.

donde los Waika, la albura del arbusto yãri natha es carnosa (gruesa). waika yãri natha pe yãhi ma re totihii.

meat, flesh, muscle. yãhiki.

don't think that you will be able to express yourself better after having taken the spicy drink, don't think that. yãimoro wa u ha koani: 'ya aka ta hayuowei', a kutihe, a kutihe.

claim that from the Karohi people, since you know how to express yourself. hei 'karohi' theri pe riha e ta nakare, wa aka ma re hayuowei.

to speak the Yanomami language; to be able to participate correctly in ceremonial dialogues; to know how to present a request or demand properly; to actively participate in trade exchanges; to emit an intermittent whistle by making a rotational movement with the tongue. hayuowei.

mi tharia: to not be well aligned (elongated objects stuck in the ground). mi tharia: no estar bien alineados (objetos alargados clavados en el suelo).

aligned. alineados.

to heat up, to reheat; to rise, to get up. yotaai.

due to the fact that from the beginning he could not resist (lit. the naiki he hore tiraprou ha maoni, naiki yakeamai ha shoataruni (mit. : renounce) his cannibalistic desire, it persisted. ).

to resist. yakeamai.

the pijiguaos start to grow big. rasha ke ki primomou.

they start to grow big. primomorãyou.

to repair a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakaai.

scratch oneself once with a. hãsikio.

to have a beard. kaweiki weuhuwe.

to have a beard. weuhuwe.

the hekura woman called Shapokonayoma has come to pour magical substances into my food. shapokonayomani ke yare he koamai ha kupohoroni (cha.

to offer food, to feed someone. kupohoroni.

destroy this now. ei a ta wãriãprai shoaro.

to destroy, to damage. wariti.

will someone from the neighborhood have killed my relative. kini ipa thora a teai pea ma ta kurahewe.

thick, slightly pasty; somewhat soft (the earth); malleable. yãhihiwe.

to let saliva drool (durative, plural acts). kahu upe ukukãi.

he let his saliva drool, and then sucked it back up. kama kahu upe ukurayoma.

to let saliva drool and then suck it back up before it falls (a game played by young people under the influence of hallucinogens). ukukãi.

the earth is crumbling. mashitha a hishiai.

it was no use putting stones (to plug the holes), the water undermined the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

to be undermined, to be eroded. hishii.

"little do we care that they built their house apart", we said. "pe the pe shaponomou ayao petao", yamaki kuma.

to have constructed, repaired or maintained a collective dwelling. shaponomorayou.

in the cultivated field he crushed a plant against the ground. hikari theka hami api ke nasi wekepram a k e m a.

come, you will see the cultivated field. hapohe, wama theka mipe.

cultivated field, farm plot. hikari theka.

they opened (along the fire) the packages of fish. yuri pe hãro mi hapei re kupeiwehei.

to open. on.

it is located behind me (to help me fight the demon that is in the sick person). we a re ithope ye (cha.

to be located behind the dwelling (temporary shelters). ithope.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco.). shoataa.

in this place we (two) will make love with the women (hidden in the vegetation). ihami re pehe the he pata ohomape.

to make love (hidden in the vegetation). ohomape.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yanomami have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to inject, to give an injection. piyekeomopotayo.

this does not get to boil. the yorupraroimi.

the day did not arrive and the ancestor was already awake. pe the mi harupraroimi totihiwe ha porepore a rãi ha kuparuni (mit.

not arrive at, not get to. raropraroimi.

to fill up (a place). hithokãmai.

the anaconda ate the feline. wãikoya ke kini ira a warema.

anaconda. wãikoya.

hallucinogenic drink (lit. puu ke u.

eat honey. puu upe ta wari.

honey. puu.

to be crooked, not straight. kayareprawe.

I have the sensation of fish biting a bait repeatedly. yahatoto hami pe no ikrekerayopi.

I have the sensation of fish biting a bait repeatedly (like catfish do when they bite a bait). ikrekerayopi.

possessive. posesivo.

to have separated definitively. shekererayou.

to fall and get caught. wahehe.

they paint their bodies and put white down on their heads. the pe yãmou, the pe he horoimou.

to put white down on someone. horoipei.

to accumulate. tikamarei.

Rana arched her back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch oneself for a moment. hiketetou.

to pierce, to perforate (once); to pierce a child. hitosoai.

omawe koheki roared at nightfall. omawe koheki pata re rario re weyarakiri.

mythical being; it has a feline head, huge arms and is arboreal. It attacks men to devour them.. weyarakiri.

to incline the head to receive a blow from an adversary. he mi teio.

to hang, to incline, to bend. tei.

we left the arrows to dry in the sun in a clearing in the forest where the trees leave a piece of sky exposed. the misi ka yakeo kuope ha yama pe shereka ropramai.

to leave arrows to dry in the sun in a clearing in the forest. ropramai.

to loosen a knot or binding, to fasten loosely. prorokei.

he has arrived. he potoshi.

to have arrived. potoshi.

to emerge, come out. ureai.

to become clean, to become unoccupied (ground). noshi tãihãi.

she is still a virgin. a ka komi shoawe.

to have a plugged ear, to be deaf. fyimikaki komi.

plugged, virgin (a woman). ka komi.

the mount Shãshãripiwei whose slope is covered with vertical yellowish lines. shãshãripiwei ki pariki pata frãihiwe re sherorati.

whose slope is covered with vertical yellowish lines. sherorati.

the man went in company with the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). eri ke ki nini thapore tao, wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

to mix, to intermingle, to blend. nikereai.

Where is my part of the loincloth. weti ipa napeyoma ke a. Did you tear yours into two strips (to offer me one). wa siki sheririprarihawe.

to tear or cut into several strips. sheririrei.

he was transporting a bunch of seje on his back. hoko a yehipoherima.

tomorrow I will cut a pijiguao palm and make a club on the way. henaha rasha ya si tuyei, himo ke ya thapraheripe.

verbal suffix indicating movement or action during displacement. -mt.

to have sinusoidal lines, made with the nails on a colored background, painted on the chest. tikekeo.

to have crumbled/collapsed (perfective aspect of an inchoative verb). hashishirayou.

to gather, to join, to reunite. ira.

here, in this place, had received a deep wound in the chest. eyeha ke totihi, pei ke pariki hami ke the ka pata ha wãyãkãoperei.

had received a deep wound. wãyãkãoperei.

(he/she) stood on tiptoe. mamiki hiteshekei.

to stand on tiptoe for a moment. mamiki hiteshetou.

to stand on tiptoe. hiteshekei.

they grabbed her by the arm and forced her to get going. hurayomahe.

he was really content. a puhi toprarotii y a i o m a.

to feel happiness or contentment. puhi toprakei.

1. To place a recipient. tirere.

to cause peeling. hikekeamai.

to be completely drunk (southern Orinoco dialect). ates- hishima amothami.

completely. ates-.

to be infested with fly larvae. mothepi.

bot. mamokoyoma hi.

to turn over an eyelid (by playing). mamokoyoma.

to come undone, to fall off. kohihiãi.

to be a supernatural being associated with a white, crystalline, more or less translucent stone, who takes possession of the pei mi ãmo (soul) of human beings. kakurumathawe.

headdress of the hekura with the appearance of the demon omãyãri, it resembles the rainbow. watoshe omãyãri.

they cut manaka palm stems into spears very quickly. manaka si sherisheria re yaiapotayonowehei.

to do very quickly. fsherisheri.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). ihororomi.

to draw/trace several transverse lines. yãprutamai.

we climbed the mountain and reached the summit. yamaki mi re yãmopeheriiwei, yamaki mi re totoparekiriowei.

we climbed the mountain and reached the summit. yãmopeheriiwei.

everything that lives or grows in the forest. honoho.

to paint oneself on the face with lines. tiporeo.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksand attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

to attract (to the bottom of the water). ikokoreiwei.

belongs to the taxonomic system of trees. nathohi.

to have become concave on the outside (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). wapokorayou.

he is very happy. rehareha natosiki.

to be happy. natosiki.

I did not sleep during the night. ya mamo he wakararayoma.

I did not sleep during the night. wakararayoma.

bone marrow. uhutupi.

to kill someone with an arrowhead. ãtãri ãhiprai.

to kill someone with an arrowhead. ãhiprar.

to become less and less visible in the darkness (perfective aspect of the inchoative form). waroshorayou.

the little one was suckling (from his mother's breast). ihiru ke a wai hesi hoturoma.

to suckle (a baby). mamaba.

to become soft, to become flexible. uhurupiai.

the son of Jaguar was mute. ira ihirupi e aka porepi re kuonowei.

the one who was beautiful was called Kuyarowe (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). katehe a re kuonowei, kuyarowe a wãhã kuoma.

to be mute; to be unable to participate in ceremonial dialogues; to not know the Yanomami language; to speak badly (for a small child); to give objects without receiving anything in return. kuonowei.

Sure. hão, weti the ha hi rii hipekei.

he has given the bow. hipekei.

Siroromi crushed his entire body, and when he had finished he dug his nails into the top of his skull. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei, a hutikia ha hititirarini pei re hemono ha imisiki re kepeiwei.

to crush by squeezing with the fingers. hutikia.

(he) climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honey nests that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi".

to climb a very tall tree in order to get oriented. tipeteonowei.

to execute a task quickly. haiproimi.

if you come to throw me to the ground, I will repel you and crush your nose by hitting it with a stick. ware sheyeprakema ma kui, pe hãiã mi ha heturuni pe hutosi yatikiamai mi hetuo.

to crush something by hitting it with a stick. yatikiamai.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (to see his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

to experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. yokekou.

to leave (by negligence) the meat to start rotting. kopiamai.

go lie down over there in front. a ta periikuhuru.

to go and do something upriver or in front. ikuhuru.

to be totally burned by fire, to receive the totality of something. wathepei.

to be angry. poãkãmi.

while they were hurrying to make this, Rabipelado slipped surreptitiously behind the women's backs (to flee). wake ka thai noshi hariraaihe tehe nãroriwe suwe ke pe yaipe hami a hiririãprarou yaioma.

funeral pyre. hariraaihe.

my son, here comes the buzzing that precedes (and announces) the arrival of the puriwa. a reãã wã re pariimi ye.

a vivid red decorative element in the headdress of the hekura. puriwa.

they are my arrow canes. kamiye ya asherekapi siki.

my arrow canes. asherekapi.

to limp, to hobble. kayehewe.

for a while. hushuprao.

a bent flexible rod like a racket, which supports a woven structure of vines on which the bark of the tree is placed to dry over the fire. kããkããmi.

¿hay sobrevivientes. wa the pe shee peria ta yaira ke.

survivors. sobrevivientes.

in the place where we ate many wild yams. kapiromi yama komi hapa re waperei hami.

place. lugar.

to argue. hira.

I am afraid. wãrãshãã ke ki.

to be afraid. wãrãshãã.

to authorize or send (once) someone to do something. nape shimiãi.

to authorize or send someone to do something. activinape.

the spider monkeys move along the trees. hii pe hami pasho pe imii.

come back to me for a moment balancing. ata imiprao kooima.

how quickly gossip spreads. kurahe wãno pe ma re imikouwei.

to walk balancing, to move along trees, along branches. imiwe.

vine; Ocotea neesiana (Lauraceae). pokora mosithoku.

am I not here like a frog or like a mapanare lying on the ground. the wãri yoyo yerea ta kurani, the ki aroami praa ta kurani, the pe wãri ma ta kuorani.

as a frog or as a mapanare lying on the ground. kuorani.

the children were hunting little birds. ihiru peni kirithami pe niyatumahe.

little birds. niyatumahe.

to have someone paint such a line on one's face. mi tiporemou.

line that joins one cheek to the other passing over the forehead. tipore.

he untied his hammock again and hung it somewhere else. kihami peki hirihiã ha koikuni.

to fix a loose tie between two points; to hang a hammock. fririhikei.

object that can be torn with the hands. kakamou.

(belongs to the epistemic modality). re RVwei.

particle that plays an important role in syntax. RVwei.

the little turtle put its foot on land and they grabbed it. totori a wai ha washiritaikuni, a wai ha hurihireheni.

put the foot on land, get out of the water or canoe. washiritaikuni.

the sorcerers felt cold. okã pe wahaturayoma.

to cause cold, to provoke cold. wahatumai.

I will tie my penis (with the cord I wear around my waist). ya mo haoope.

to tie the foreskin with a cord. mo hao.

to be floating. taprawe.

to produce pots. urere.

he did not delay in reaching Aparecido's path, then he walked on a plain. pore re a no mayo hami yeture e he hapraoma, a he yaripekir i o m a.

to walk on a plain, on flat ground. yariai.

to feel sick. heparoho.

to decorate an object or person by imprinting a hand painted with colorant (plural objects). raokoprawe.

magnificent, Dormilona swayed in the middle of the group. wathaperariwe re a noshi harirawe krei kupariyoma.

the noise of branches broken by the storm was heard. fwatori pe pata re kreikreimoperei.

sway, rock, tilt forward and backward; stagger, lean, slump down abruptly (often in a threatening manner). krei.

he came here several times, the tip of his penis is hooked. heyemi re the nohi hupraai kui, pei re the mo wãi nohi payokoa kuyahi.

to be partially curved, to have a curved end. payokoa.

Translation:. koãnaye ninihi.

frog. koãna.

the son of Õmawe (a h e k u r a) struck the thing with a machete, and it broke. omawe ke ihirupini the ki re yakekeprareiwei, the ki hetirayoma.

to fight against a supernatural being by striking it with a machete. yakekeprai.

in a beautiful house was hung a hammock painted with a transverse line, drawn with onoto. riyehewe totihiwe ke the yãnopi ha thoopi thoku tipruta yãoma.

to paint, trace a transverse line on something or someone; to scratch once transversely. tiprutai.

to become blunt by successive impacts (arrowhead). pohotoprou.

to be slightly greasy (body of a living being). shãrokoai.

to walk on mamiki (a type of plant). mamiki kayetimou.

to walk on. kayetimo.

edible frog; Leptodactylus pentadactylus (Leptodactylidae). Lives in deep underground galleries; almost always hunted by women.. fãsipi.

the leaves wet with dew just brush against you, but nevertheless they remove the down (stuck on your hair). henaki pakihou peo ma kui, yetu horoi ke ki wai heomopotayou.

they remove the down (stuck on your hair). heomopotayou.

my fireplace is next to an exit. ipa yãno nanokaa.

to occupy a dwelling place near an exit. nanokaa.

to curl up, to coil. kreteai.

he is completely cured. a temi heikiaguacate.

he is completely cured. heikiaguacate.

to climb rapidly. hithehithe.

now that things are barely perceptible (in the dark), we will get lost, we say. pei inaha the wai waroshoo tehe pemaki yakeriheri, yamaki ha kuni.

to be barely perceptible in the dark. yakeriheri.

1. To shell (e.g. corn). 2.. hushishiai.

(the magic substance) took effect quickly and Lizard (unconscious) loosened his hands and began to slide slowly into the void. yetu re a yuai ha kuparuni rehariwe a wereariyo.

to begin to do something slowly or gradually. taariyo.

to tie a fishing line to a branch (to catch catfish at night). fãsitha karoramai.

to fish by tying a fishing line to a branch. karoramai.

I am happy. humoromi henaki.

to be happy. humoromi.

partió una rama cargada de frutos y la dejó caer. himoihimo ke ki ha keprarini a kemarema.

to drop fruits from a branch. himoihimo.

to wish misfortune on someone, to disappoint someone. wã no waheo.

to wish misfortune on someone, to disappoint someone. wahe.

to put completely yellow, dye or paint completely yellow. ashimam.

to sew locally, to perform a darn in a place. elina.

the revenge is fulfilled, they have split in two the arrowhead. enaha re ãhi rii kuwe, ãhi rii akatahuprai waikirayou kuhahei.

to split or divide in two. ker.

softened, loosened. wihihiwe.

to offer two objects at once. horohokei.

to fabricate an object with walls too high. okoray.

thotho. wãkowãkoma.

he broke his arm with a stick blow. naprushini kama poko yahekirema.

I broke the electric eel in two by hitting it. koã ãsho ya yahekiprarema.

to break into several pieces. yahekirarei.

in two. en dos.

It is very bitter. The payahawemi.

to lose bitterness (of poisonous fruit). payaha.

eat fish. yuri pe ta warihe.

eat. warihe.

la pasarela se hundió bajo el agua cuando pasé sobre ella (para cruzar el río). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

pasarela, troja. ihiraki.

the state of the return of the hekura. qué el regreso de los h ekura.

state. qué.

to have finished decorating something with crosses. yakirarei.

dry cracking sound made by crushing a louse between the nails; any similar sound. pihimou.

first I caught the fish by harpooning them with an arrow, then I killed them with a machete. sherekani yuri ya pe tiwehai parioma, siparani ya pe tuyei mahioma.

then, next, later, finally. sherekani.

he took the pot away. kamani hapoka a tereherima.

to take, to carry away. tereherimah.

tell them to be quiet, some of them insist on saying they will go to war. a wã no wasio ta poo, ai pe the pe ã he prakehou tharei.

to insist, to persist, to be obstinate. prakeheai.

it is far away. he yathehea.

to be far away, to be at a distance. yathehe.

they (the hekura) always carry their bamboo arrows under their arm, that's how they move around. ei wa ki hetho shiro kãi ta hãkihãkiprarai tharahe (cha.

they always carry their bamboo arrows under their arm. hãkihãkiprarai.

he is angry. sherekawe naka hi.

to be angry. sherekawe.

they (upriver) did it in turn. kama ke e ﬁmoni a shea mi hetupirema.

to do in turn, to alternate, to change activity or instrument. ﬁmoni.

ithore 1 vb. ithore 1 vb. intr. intr. t ithoreai, inc. t ithoreai, inc. : to curve, to bend; to become curved, bent. : curvar, doblar; ponerse curvo, doblado.

curved. curvo.

to soften. reblan-.

he gathered fruits and let them fall. ﬁmoﬁmo a ha keprarini a kemarema.

to drop, let fall. ﬁmoﬁmo.

to wish misfortune on someone, to disappoint someone. wã no waheo.

to wish misfortune on someone, to disappoint someone. wahe.

you (fem. nape shimiãprai.

to insist before someone to send them to do something. shimiãprai.

the dog was a very good hunter. hiima a nihitao he parohooma.

it is very heavy. the hute he parohowe.

she was called Woman-honey and was very beautiful. y ãmonãmãriyoma a wãhã kuoma, riyehewe he parohowe a kuoma (mit.

very, much. parohooma.

converge, head towards. puhura.

to keep something covered. popou.

knot. moshoko.

to imitate, parody, mimic someone; to measure (the length of something), evaluate (a quantity), count. owekei.

the woman was sitting on the sand. mrakatahu a kuope ha suwe a tirereoma.

was sitting on the ground. tirereoma.

to sleep. mio.

there were mosquitos (supernatural) in the waterfall. yawaramapiwei a pora ha peti naki rooma.

there were mosquitos (supernatural). yawaramapiwei.

the people of Yeprope theri hit me with the flat side of their machetes, they really made me stagger. hei yeprope theri ke pe wãrini ware yoapramai ha totihioheni , yare atateapraramai re totihiohe.

made (someone) stagger. ataterayou.

I ate wahara fruits. Wahara ke ki a huu.

fruit of the wahara tree. wahara.

to climb a palm or a. hiriri.

the base of a flat basket. yorehi si kohomo.

base of a container or basket. kothe.

Broth from cooking meat. Yaro pei ke pouku.

broth from cooking (game, fish, etc.). pouku.

plants. namoku.

placed. colocado.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). orãmisiwe.

when they had resurrected, they got up quickly. the pe horiã ha hititiraruni, the pe hoketama.

they had resurrected. hititiraruni.

I crushed (intentionally) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to step on, to crush an object by stepping on it. katika.

to be in a hammock whose ends are tied one higher than the other. wereheo.

to make something become dusty. hekrãpiãmai.

titi monkey; Callicebus torquatus (Cebidae). yokoyokomi.

to improve, to fix, to repair; to order, to classify. tomai.

it is shiny like a wire. hawe ãrãpre ke ki sipo mimou rãtirãtiwe kuwe.

wire. ãrãpre.

you will go to ask for arrows from one hearth to another. shereka wa pe nakai mi athope.

to go from hearth to hearth, to make the rounds of the central plaza going from one hearth to another. athope.

we tensed our bows and advanced crouched. yama the pe ha iyoararini yamaki tereteremoherim a.

to tense (a bow). naahi.

in several places they have broken bushes by hand to mark the place where they passed, in a single place several trails cross. hii ke hi pe re keapotayouwehei, pe te mãyo yãshikiã kua ha tahiaikuni.

to have a trail (the ground). yãshikiã.

I scrape the shaft of the bow with a knife. sipara sini hãto ya nahi hirikai.

to scratch, to scrape with the tip or edge of an instrument, making a downward motion. tisiki.

(he) walks fast and leaves behind in a short time a certain place. he toretai.

to walk fast and leave a place behind in a short time. toretai.

a swamp, a lagoon. pe mo un pantano, una laguna.

swamp, lagoon. pe mo.

to become smooth and glossy (hair of a dog). tãihirayou.

shelter for sleeping. kasiki*.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. Maatha.

it was useless for the son to feel despair, they threw his mother into the water. pe ihirupi ke e puhi uhutuai ma perani, pe nii e kea shoamaparemahe.

to feel a sudden great sadness. uhututou.

they are cooking the pijiguaos that we want to take away. rasha a hariihe, yama pe niya re yehipouwei.

to take away, to carry away. yehipouwei.

I will leave (to go somewhere else). e dejaré (para ir a otra parte).

I will leave. dejaré.

pónganse en camino, y que nadie se demore. pe ta kuhamiyo, ai pe huu heparuhe.

pónganse en camino. kuhamiyo.

vomit (verb). kano nahipe ho-.

brother-in-law, above all do not insinuate that it is dirty. shori, shami himai tikootihe.

above all, do not come to visit with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

do not insinuate, do not say. tikootihe.

to cause (negligently) the softening of a cassava bread. wihiamai.

to be soft or tender locally. uhutitia.

to be decorated with circles. foni rohehewe.

to be decorated with circles. rohehewe.

round object that has lost a piece due to a strike. yareshea.

mode of locomotion of reptiles. ethethou.

I'm going to have a dog gifted to me. hiima ipa ya praarei.

to get a dog as a gift, to have a dog gifted to oneself. praarei.

that is the reason why I do not want to be dead. yaro kahiki re keonowei the yãno pe si ahi nikerei.

dead. nikerei.

they are the only ones who frequently eat tapir. shama the pe iyai ayao heparoai.

to be the only one in a given situation. heparoai.

Translation:. nakasiki warirorewe.

fruits of the pahakotorawe tree. akasiki.

1. to twist, to twist a vine or bark to soften it; 2. a vine that has been softened in this way. yaprote.

to be angry. hoteri.

but as there were no footprints, they stopped. the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

to have several footprints. yashikitaami.

to be cold. wahatuai.

to peel, to skin (durative, plural object). si tiprokai.

to have peeled/skinned (perfective). si tiprokorayou.

to peel, to skin (an animal). tiprokai.

to stick along something (especially, an arrow that sticks along someone when falling). wikokoprou.

you all have to go live in another place. shomi hami ke wamaki ha perihore.

to live in another place. perihore.

it is no doubt because of those constant itchings that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

constant itching. preaturou.

brother-in-law, don't tell me to keep the woman pinned down (lit. shoriwe ya the ãshi re hikipore kutihe, kutihe.

to keep pressed down, to keep pinned down. hikipore.

new sprout (shoot, offshoot, stem); new feather of a growing bird. hiputu.

Siroromi crushed his body completely. pei a hami siroromini a hutikiatarai re shoapariyonowei.

he crushed it completely. hutikiatarai.

The bulbs are dried on top of the kemaculina (plant used in sorcery). masha sherini, makayo ke ki ka ha a nomawe kemaculina (heri ).

plant used in sorcery. kemaculina.

to indicate (upriver dialect). feri.

they made a crunching sound as they walked on the dry leaves. the pe shurushurupraroma.

making a crunching sound (from walking on dry leaves or dense vegetation). shurushurua.

to bend the arm. poko shãkotou.

to bend, to fold, to curl. shãko.

I have no desire to go there. ya no hupimi.

to have no desire to go there. hupimi.

the pijiguao palm aged, and its wood became hard. rasha si amahiãi.

to age and harden (wood of palm). amahiãi.

as I am accustomed to touching women, I intend to lie next to one to fondle her. suwe ya pe hupetarai ha, ya imiki niya yakao.

to touch women. hupetarai.

to become painful. ninikei.

dogs lift their leg to urinate. hiima pe waku ayatou pe niaasi keyei tehe.

thigh. fwaku.

come, little brother, don't leave the path, be careful of the snake. hapo, oãsi, a paatihe, oru keki.

be careful. keki.

he tapped his teeth rapidly (with his index finger). pei e naki hupehupemoma.

he/it. pei.

(they two) dried out the water hole where Rahararitawe lived, and he, dying of thirst and crying, because of them ran from side to side (looking for water). a no hete ha wehemaparini, rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama (mit.

to make dry, to dry out; to protect from rain. wehemarei.

to have stood on tiptoe. hitesherayou.

they looked for them, but since there were no footprints, they stopped. the pe taeo ma kui, the wai yashikitaami ha pe re uprahaonowei.

to have various footprints. yãshikiwe.

fish. morocoto.

to have felt bad. thareherariyo.

(interjection expressing hitting a target with a bamboo arrow). tisi.

to hit a target with a bamboo arrow (ruhu masi). tisi.

to divide, to share (for giving). shekerekei.

to divide into several groups. shererepram.

to go with others in a canoe. tikerayou.

I will mash the seje fruits and dilute the pulp in water. hoko ya mau yaruai.

Brother-in-law, here they purify you (with a liquid). pei ke, shori, wa yaruu ke a kupohei.

to clean the inside of an object, to mash fruit in water. yaruai.

be attentive while walking. a ta moyaweaheri.

be attentive while walking. moyaweaheri.

I have been denouncing it for a long time. ya wã katititao ma re kui.

to do something for a long time, to have been doing something for a long time. katititao.

fruit from which a damaged part has been removed by a local incision. hikorea.

duerme en un chinchorro mugriento. yii ke ki tepepishi ha a perio.

to make dirty, to soil. tepepishiamai.

la nutria se desplazaba (hacia ellos), estirando el cuello en algunos sitios (por encima del agua). wãi katiatarou ha kooimani.

stretching the neck in some places (over the water). kooimani.

to acquire a hollowed out circular mark (on a cylindrical or spherical object). esheheãi.

to press, to squeeze. yarukeaprai.

to have slowly extinguished (a fire). wãnonorayou.

perfective of the verb pasu-, wã tisu-. tishishiakei.

to go far away. payekeai.

leaves submerged in water and agitated by the current with a permanent swaying motion. shetashetamou.

Invite someone to come live nearby. aheterei.

I have the habit of coiling a thick liana (around my ankles) because they generally wear out quickly (when climbing or descending a palm tree). prowehewe ke ya thotho pe motorewe thapou tharei, the pe kãi waruhou si ihehewe.

to form a ring; to be coiled, to form a circle. motorewe.

to have eyes beginning to open (young animal). homo.

to help me fight the demon that is in the sick person. ya sipararithawe descienhushomi.

to help me fight the demon that is in the sick person. descienhushomi.

an enormous anaconda was rising on its back. pei mapuukapi hami wãikoyã ki pata re uprarayouwei (mit.

back, loin muscles. uprarayouwei.

the lechosa (fruit) begins to be a little ripe in one spot. shamakoro wãisipi a shopo patia.

to draw a stain; to burn a single spot in the garden. patiai.

two guayucos have been put one next to the other. porakapi wayuko ke kipi herurua.

to put two objects together. ruyutu.

to snore, to crackle (the fire). frãrãrã.

they were the first to climb, and many Yanomami climbed after them. pe tua ha pariikutuni, pruka yãnomãmi the pe tuo re hepariyonowei.

after them. hepariyonowei.

in all parts they are alive and in good health. temi ke the pe wãri perihiwe.

same, identical. perihi.

he was really content. a puhi toprarotii y a i o m a.

to feel happiness or contentment. puhi toprakei.

those (the shamans) who are capable of spitting the magical substances, from their mouth comes a foam similar to shapo. the pe pehi hoã re thaowei, hawe shapo ke u pe pata kuwe.

synonym. shapo.

a young boy who has not yet uncovered his glans. kama shegosto (un muchacho joven que todavía no puerekapini paruri ya niyaprarema).

to uncover one. puerekapini.

to make loud love (said by a man). sokãsokãmou.

to pierce, to make a hole (once) using a pointed object. hiroshorei.

to sin. monarimi.

a woman is lying next to me in the hammock. suwe ke ya yakapou.

to keep close to oneself in a hammock; to carry a small child in one. yakapou.

to shake or sway something planted in the ground, to test if it is firmly rooted. hãwete.

crossed paths. oni yãhiriwe.

crossed in all directions, intermingled. yãhiriwe.

to calumniate or denounce someone, to tell a story (after having been reluctant). wayoprai.

there is a swampy ground (at the bottom of the water), you will fall into it. heãhãtu ke pe praa kuporei, wamaki kepoheri.

to fall into (something). kuporei.

and told what had happened to the one fulfilling his marital service. a re siyohamouwei ke iha a wã hai shoaom a.

told what had happened to the one fulfilling his marital service. siyohamouwei.

edible seed of the platanillo plant. mokohe.

female spirit associated with the mashohara plant. mashoharayoma.

to make round, spherical. komoreãmai, inc.

to make round, spherical. komoreãmai.

the survivors fled far away. prahai hami the pe wai shee tokurayoherima.

to keep leftovers. sheepou.

to call or attract attention by making a brief sucking sound, placing the tongue against the alveolar ridge (in front or laterally). teketekemorãyou.

an ancestor accompanied the winged termites to the sky. poreporeri osheri ke pe rii ha the ha nikereroherini.

to accompany, to go along with. poreporeri.

I make the clothes dry. iro ya siki washimai.

to make a wet object dry, to dry an animal skin. washimai.

it has really the intention of making it end, it has really the intention of making it die. a mi niya wathemai ha totihioni, a niya waikamai ha totiohioni (mit.

to have the real intention of making something/someone end, to have the real intention of killing something/someone. totiohioni.

to be afraid. shotokoma.

quédense tranquilos, no roben, no dejaré de prohibirles (que molesten a los demás). huritihehe, huritihehe, kiha ya wãno wasio kuyeheo mai ke the.

to prohibit, prevent from doing something. wasi.

one person. mamokahiwe.

one. mokahi.

to grab by the shoulders, to hold by the shoulders. fãkihi.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of Mount Gallinetas. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to move around for a while on a summit. pororotou.

to be angry. yotata.

I will go to look for powerful hekuras in their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make a cylindrical or approximately round object pivot or rotate on itself, making it describe less than a half turn. hãmoriãi.

certain parts of the roots protrude from the soil surface. hii nasiki pe urea.

to protrude partially, to emerge partially. urea.

to touch, to feel. fupa.

to sway, to swing (object, tree). wekewekemou.

to make someone get lost. ohorumai.

to make an object not too big. kuwetaprai.

to roll up in a spiral. yapureai.

he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River. he rãyoko.

(he speaks of the south of the Orinoco River). rãyoko.

manner of shouting that. korereamou.

to kneel. hithei.

the vultures have a bald skull. watupa pe hesi tahawe.

to suffer naturally from partial baldness. hesi tahawe.

I'm not going to hurry to show myself. kamiye ya tapramou haio mai ke the.

they are not found, they are invisible. pe taproimi totihiwe ke a thare.

to show oneself, to let oneself be seen. taarariyo.

the hallucinogenic drug seems strong, his face took on a serious expression. epena a no wayuopi a mimou puhi tikrohowe.

1. To be satiated. 2. To have an odious, sullen or worried look; to put on a serious expression.. tikrohowe.

to make a deep cut in a tree. shoeke.

when the cave stopped being suffocating, they (entered and) cut Yotenama into pieces. yotenama ke a pata theka naki mrai tehe, a pata re pahetirareiwei (mit.

they cut into pieces. pahetirareiwei.

the chicken ran with its wings extended. kakara ihirupi hehewe a rereapraroma.

to extend the wings for a moment. hehetou.

to stagger. wahohoai.

to make several knots on multiple objects. moshokoremai.

to sneeze. erekou.

I forgave you (but I have not forgotten). pe nohi asipou poo.

to have forgiven. asipou.

the end of the stick is twisted several times. the hi ora toyekewe.

completely twisted or bent; twisted in several places. toyekeprawe.

the fierce animal approached rapidly. yaro ke a pata re ikuikutakeiwei.

to approach rapidly, to direct oneself swiftly towards. ikutakei.

it is pleasant to touch with the foot (= it is pleasant to the touch). the kapamamou totihitawe.

sensation produced by an object when touched with the foot. kapamamou.

Bachaco was cutting down trees. kasheshewe yorehi si tuyeprai shoarayokuaaiwei.

Bachaco was cutting down trees. shoarayokuaaiwei.

I go in that direction chasing little birds. heyemi kirithami ya pe nosi pou kuimati.

to go in that direction. kuimati.

to make sharp, to sharpen. namokei.

he closed the hole firmly. a ka kahua rohothokema.

to strengthen, make firm (plural objects). rohothoakei.

he opened the hammock he was carrying, and lay down for a while. abierto el chinchorro que traía, y se tendió un buen rato.

lay down. tendió.

falling one after another (fruits). shithãi.

the fat causes nausea. tapitapi pe pariki shi harihamai.

to cause nausea, to provoke the urge to vomit. harihamai.

I wanted to accompany him. yamaki tuve ganas de acompañarlo.

to want. yamaki.

to disperse to do a sweep or a search. rãkokou.

(Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted). a oni frãihiwe totihitawe.

to be painted with transverse lines. pinoni.

the fish will be pungent. yuri a nakiprariyo.

to become stronger, more pungent, or more acidic (perfective form). nakerayou.

offer it to the ones and the others. pe ta topeapotu.

offer it to the ones and the others. topeapotu.

your knife fell into the water. siparahe si a kepariyoma.

you will make me fall into the water. ya kepariyoma.

fell into the water. kepariyoma.

I arrived when he was gravely ill. a hariri prao totihio tehe ya warokema.

despite being ill, he defended himself bravely. hariri a ma kui a waitherimoma.

to become ill, to get sick. hihatho.

to eat. kuu.

to begin to mix. koyokoprai.

to sprout vigorously (a plant). tiriri.

to have gray hair (durative). irepii.

the hole in the rock is very narrow. wawa e hena kuprou shoarayoma, yetu ke e.

narrower (hole, cavity). wãkikirayou.

to change the subject, especially when not wanting to comply with a request. hãrokei.

the woman lived at the bottom of the water, in a dwelling as dry as this one where we are now. mau hushomi hami suwe ke a perioma, shapono kure naha ei naha e the hushomi hashitiwe kuoma.

it is floury (lit. the wamou hashitiwe.

to be dry, not to be flooded. hashitiwe.

what is cooking in the pot. ¿qué está cocinando en la olla.

how many are there. weti naha the kua.

what smell do you have. weti naha ke wa ni kuaai.

what?. ¿qué?.

go there to blow/fan the fire (to make it burn brighter). koa wake ta horakutu.

go there to blow/fan the fire (to make it burn brighter). horakutu.

to be insistent by nature. he prakehewe.

they do not give the yãmonashi drink. shee pe shiro yãmonashi uku.

they. shee.

to shorten a bamboo arrowhead (durative, plural object). pookosimai.

to start doing something. pathothoai.

Tiger snake hunter. Erpiente tigra cazadora.

snake. erpiente.

the hekura watch the path, and each time I make them desist. hekura re peni yo nohi wãri ha thapoheni, pei ya pe wãri kuyeataramai (cha.

I make them desist. kuyeataramai.

to do something for a moment. wãmoretou.

come here. re kepraruhe.

come here. kepraruhe.

the fish pulls the fishing line or guaral slightly several times. yuri a ikoikomou.

to pull slightly several times. ikoikomou.

to be crushed. nahihiãi.

but they made it (the tree) grow very tall. kihami re hi tiremapi kuaai re shoakeiwei.

to make grow (plural objects). tiremai.

hekura that transmigrates. hekura fuehaprapi.

that transmigrates. fuehaprapi.

malefic supernatural being of the yai the class; it is a cannibal that lives in an ardent world in gestation, the tuku ke misi. mothokariwe.

the enemy warriors shot them both with arrows. wayu peni ke kipi niyapraremahe.

they shot them with arrows. niyapraremahe.

to mimic sexual intercourse by sliding the right index finger between the left thumb and index finger. fimiki hishãhishãmou.

to make love (said by a man), to mimic sexual intercourse. hishãhishãmou.

Small rope made from the fibers of the yamaa plant. ãsitha*.

to start doing it locally. hirikiprai.

for a while. hushuprao.

to cook directly over the fire (without hanging it). tirereapei.

I am the Spider-Spirit hanging upside down (on the web). hãhãrãmãethawe ya ihohoa kuyahi (cha.

generic term: designates all web-spinning spiders. hãhã.

if you move in this way, the humans will hear you and kill you. minaha wa kuaai tehe poreri peni wa hoã hirireihe, wa niyaprareihe.

thus, in this way, in this manner. minaha.

he shot an arrow at a little bird and it got stuck (in the tree). kirithami a pehi ha niyakini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot at a target. napemou.

to blink several times in a row. misi yahoy a h o m o u.

to blink. yahoy.

material. materia.

in an instant we went to look for wood, then I went quickly to collect the leaves (that I needed to cover the roof of my shelter). yetu yama the ãshope ha pathothani, yetu yãã re ya henaki perema.

to work together; to exchange goods (during a trade). pathothai.

the otter was curled up in a place where the bank was high and ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo horokoape ha, proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to be curled up in a place where the bank ends abruptly. hikoikuni.

shamanism. chamanismo.

to sink into the water under the weight of something. kaokopariyo.

the moriche fruits become slightly yellowish when they are almost ripe. eteweshi a shopou tehe a okoroshi.

to become slightly red or yellowish, to begin to ripen (of fruits). shopou.

if you kill a big fat tapir near the lagoon, you will go to the conuco to get plantains to go with it. ware ke a pata tapiri shekiaremahe a wãri wawewawe praope ha kuratha wamaki ha toararini wama a tehiape.

lagoon, pond, marsh. korokoro.

the carrying strap stretched out. yãri natha prayukuprou.

to have stretched or extended downwards (perfective). prayukukei.

rolled and kneaded cassava dough to be dried over the fire. kohipe.

to come from the bottom of a hole or den (noise). fwã hai pawewe.

to accumulate at the bottom of something, to form a deposit; to live at the bottom of a den (animal). pawewe.

they threw him dead onto a pile of rocks, then dropped the club. makayo ke ki ha a nomawe ha kemaparikirini, iha himo re e nihorotamai re shoarayouwei.

to drop something perpendicularly, to throw down. nihorotamai.

plural personal pronoun, dispersed. hãkohoprawe.

the women went there to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. kreama.

when I reached the top (feeling dizzy) I wondered what I was going to do. kihami ya re heakaai totihio kuhe tehe, weti naha wa ta thawe ya puhi kutaroma.

to rise above, to reach the top of, to elevate above, to rise to the sky. heakaai.

you will step on a snake. oru wa katikirei.

I stepped right on the snake and it immediately bit me. oru keki praope ha ya ki pesheku re katikireiwei, pe the ki waweheprakei kurei.

to step on, to tread on. katikirei.

he took it off his neck and put it on the ground. haoa a re hayuprareiwei, a re prakeiwei (mt).

to put something on the ground. prakeiwei.

Canalete (proper name). Canalete.

to put food in the mouth that is held in the palm of the hand, to catch an entire prey with the mouth (animal). wahahurei.

it had become silent, it had become silent. kahiki* eemoimi, yãno* emoimi.

to be silent. yãno*.

he was lying on the ground near the lower part of the roof. shikã ha a praoma.

in the morning I was under the effect of hallucinogens. ya prao re henaopoi ke.

to be lying down, to be lying on the ground, to be under the effect of hallucinogens. pratioma.

They (two) spread epidemics in an extensive region. no wãri a aka praukumapii shoaoma.

extensive region. praukumapii.

Rabipelado simply disappeared by behind the dwelling. nãroriwe shikã hami ke a wãri mratou re perayoherinowei.

simply disappeared. perayoherinowei.

to leave something to become deformed or hardened (by negligence). prithothamai.

listen to me attentively. yimika hirãrãparu.

listened attentively. yimika hirãrããi.

to listen attentively. hirãrão.

after having camped in the forest he returned to live in the communal house. a kãi peria fa totihitaikuni, a kãi fa shaponoikuni.

to come to live in the communal house after having camped in the forest for a more or less long period. shaponokei.

to begin to expand, to start to become extensive. praukuprai.

the rock leaned slowly towards the sipara kohi tree. sipara kohi ha ke ki rakiariyoma.

while we were sitting, the sun moved slowly to this place in the sky. heyeha mothoka wai kuariyo iha re yamaki roo heai shoao t e h e.

I approached the enemy warriors (in ambush) slowly and without realizing it. wayu pe rii ha ya aheteariyo.

to move or slide slowly. wereariyo.

to crease or wrinkle completely, to have multiple creases or wrinkles in various parts. wãhihiprou.

it was at a moment of the day, identical to this [in which we find ourselves (= at the same time)] that I left for my son's house. hei nashomi naha oãsiwe ihami ya ayoma.

my younger brother, my son. oãsiwe.

the noise of an outboard motor was heard downstream that was going upstream. motoro a wã petarekirio, a wã mi yãmokirioma.

that was going upstream. yãmokirioma.

to crush an object by accidentally dropping something on it. yatikimakei.

to remove a liquid circularly using a stick, particularly something that is being cooked. yakoreakei.

he quickly painted some ugly circles on his body. wãritiwe a oni pata roherohemoma.

to paint circles on the body, to be decorated with circles. rohaha.

to cause toothache. fnaki shi tomai.

to be impatient (to do something). shi toprou.

to cause pain or discomfort. toa.

to cut the primary flight feather of a curassow and shape it to be used in making arrow fletching. heki kretitiai.

to cut and shape the primary flight feathers (of a bird). kretiti.

he had not been lying in his hammock for long when the rope of his hammock broke and also it can be The word 'perio' in Yanomami means 'to live or dwell in a certain place, to get into a hammock'. a perio mori no tetehetou tehe, a peki thaki hetii kukei.

hammock. perio.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

to scratch or uncover the ground with the foot repeatedly or continuously. hãrãrumai.

the cacao trees hung down due to the burning heat. pohoro ke hiki wai teihia ha yaiparuni, pei ke the heyoshini.

to hang down, to incline. heyoshini.

is it so. fihi thawe.

is it so? / did they succeed? (asked to warriors returning from an attack). fihi.

to break repeatedly. huhetiakei.

he who had made love with the leg (of his companion) took her as a wife and without waiting deflowered her. the matha na re waiweini a rii tea mi heturema, ka thaa re shoareiwei (mit.

leg, hind leg. heturema.

to be completely folded. wãhiwe.

to have wrinkles on the forehead. presheshewe.

since they did not want to desist, they started to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma.

to desist, to give up. tiraprarai.

1. to crawl, walk crouched; 2. to habitually obtain goods from a particular person or community. tereke.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to snore. hohoruãma.

put both hands (to receive it), it's a boy (who is being born). pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke a hoã (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

put both hands (to receive something). porakaiku.

to have a swollen leg. shekekeai.

The Yanomami paint themselves black when they go to war. pe wayu huu tehe yãnomãmi pe ishimou.

1. to burn, set fire to, ignite; 2. to blacken, stain black (locally); 3. to paint or stain the body black. ishiãi.

edible fruit of the kãyuweshirimi hi tree; Herrania lemniscata (Sterculiaceae). mãroweshi.

the girl that they raptured when they attacked us, they are certainly carrying her (on their back). suweheri pe re tereiwehei yamare shurukuuhe tehe, a yehiponowehei ke the.

they raptured. tereiwehei.

to make a basket. kreema natoshi.

to make. natoshi.

to be traced on it. tikekeamou.

to progressively widen towards the edge (in a conical or bell shape). eheteprou.

to make boil, to bring to a boil. yoru.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. wereoprou.

to arch, to be arched; to be leaning backwards due to a load with a strap that is too short (the load rests on the kidneys instead of the buttocks). krehetheo.

to be a man. pikukai.

to have a floury consistency. hotetiprou.

empu-. hãiprai.

to call (someone) moroshi; to address (a child) using that kinship term; to be in a father-child or older brother-younger brother relationship with someone. moroshimou.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually. yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

to fall asleep gradually. mikeheriiwei.

to be wrinkled or crumpled. wãihihi.

I was blocked by a deep river. mãu u oki ha ya shi wãrioma.

I left my arrow there where it was (in a tree where the speaker could not go get it). shereka ya shi wãrimakema.

to block, to obstruct. wãriãmai.

Jaguar fell (noisily), and the screaming piha bird (thinking it was thunder) started singing. ira a kerayoma, ihi ke the ãni fãifãiyomi a wã haa shoarayoma.

screaming piha bird (Lipaugus vociferans). fãifãiyomi.

to be open, separated. watetewe.

"what big teeth you have, pull them out and give them to me". kurahe wa naki wai prewe ta aya, ipa the ki ta hoyopa.

to pull out, to tear off (by exerting lateral pressure with the hand). yorarei.

(mythological example). ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to do it quickly. pusutai.

Supernatural being, lives in the celestial disk (hetu misi); he is the son-in-law of Thunder. Personaje sobrenatural, vive en el disco celestial (hetu misi); es el yerno de Trueno. His ugliness is repulsive, he sends the souls (no porepi) of the per-. Su fealdad es repulsiva, envía a las almas (no porepi) de las per.

supernatural being. wãteyoma.

plant. rehareha.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). makurutami.

to get on top of. hetuai.

to draw transverse lines, to paint transverse lines. tipruta.

I slipped and fell. ya ha kaherini ya kerayoma.

I slipped and fell. kaherini.

to be angry. ishinomo.

Do you (plural) eat bananas. kuratha a ha wamaki iyai ma ta thawe.

Is that enough. e naha thawe.

What am I going to do then. fweti naha ma ta thawe.

And then. fwhw ta thawe.

interrogative particle. thawe.

the path follows the stream. yo hiririwe.

to be along, to follow the edge of a stream (a path). hiririwe.

as you can see I am helpless and I wonder what to do. ya puhi ma re horihii, weti naha yaiwe ta thawe, ya puhi ma re kuu waikiwe.

to be helpless, to not know what to do, to be bewildered. horihii.

the women burst out laughing. suwe ke pe shoaproturou.

burst out laughing. shoaproturou.

to dent or deform by a blow (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). wãukukei.

to install one. pepimokei.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantity. yateheprou.

they are the ones who make me advance ahead as an explorer (when they go to war). re the peni yare nosi pariapraramai totihiowei.

to advance ahead as an explorer. pariapraramai.

untie those fruits and give them to me. pei wa the pe ha kusheararini ei ke the ki ta hiyo.

to untie, to unbind. kusheararini.

to groan. rããmou.

to breathe regularly, to be alive. mishiãki hai.

to be out of breath, breathless. mishiãki pakukutou (cha.

breath, breathing. mishiãki.

calm down. a ta waikitaru.

to calm down after getting angry, to become tranquil. waikitou.

again the woman described a curve. suwe e naha ke a tihiyea kuprou ha koroni.

described. tihiyea.

to emerge. ururuwe.

although he said he wouldn't do it, he stubbornly pulled out his teeth. maa a ma kuu tehe, naki hoyoa he yatikema (mit.

to insist on doing something despite being told not to, to do something stubbornly or reluctantly. hoyoa.

the two demiurgos did not go beyond Ruako, their footprints reach only up to there. ruako hami omawe ke kipi mayo he tatou kupiyei.

a place name or location. Ruako.

I'm going to break firewood by kicking it. koã ya ãsho kahekirarei.

to break multiple long rigid objects by kicking them. kahekirarei.

what should be loved. nohimamou.

they were not upset, they did not fight, they were well. pe hushuonomi, pe hiranomi, the pe topratioma.

they were well. topratioma.

when all the palm trees in one place have their clusters on the lower part of the trunk. ikrekewe.

to put a puhi. tikroho.

to obtain, to get. yãhurei.

to melt, reduce, diminish, become thin (durative). kuwetaaherii.

as soon as she arrived she sat in the hammock next to her mother. pe nii ke iha the tipepraa ha kopohoroni.

to sit in a hammock. tipe.

null. yoararomi.

the blood was rising up along my chest. pei ya pariki hami iyepe torerepeherima.

the blood was rising up. torerepeherima.

the curiara is in the middle of the river. kanawa mi ãmo hami a kãtayoa.

is located. kãtayoa.

to construct a mobile platform consisting of two crossed and tied sticks, in order to climb, without hurting oneself, the thorny trunk of the pijiguao palm; to entertain oneself by constructing a temporary shelter (a child). yaritharei.

to have a beard. fkaweiki weuhuwe.

beard. kaweiki.

to wrinkle, to crease. rukuruãi.

to have become rough, dry and rigid due to heat. roparayou.

to open a path by cutting vegetation with a cutting instrument (striking downwards or obliquely). fyo pahetimai.

to open a path by cutting vegetation. pahetimai.

to tense (the string of a bow). potehe.

to have become light red. momihirayou.

her abandoned husband felt great joy (at seeing his wife return, whom he thought was dead). pe heãropi ke e yãmi kuoma e the ãmoku yokea ha yaironi.

they kept the banana shoots piled up on Mount Mãiyo. mãiyo ke ki ha kuratha sipe hirapomahe (mit.

he left his tobacco quid in the handle of the stone axe. poo ke hetho ha pee re nahe makepoma (mit.

1. To experience a state of rapture; to rejoice at another. mãiyo.

Used within a large number of verbal endings (-amai, -prai, -mai, -aprarai, etc.). It is one of the markers of the imperfective (present).. -prai.

shawara: supernatural, cannibalistic beings, who are considered responsible for certain diseases and epidemics in general. shawara: seres sobrenaturales, caníbales, a los que se les considera responsables de ciertas enfermedades y epidemias en general.

supernatural, cannibalistic beings. shawara.

jo, déjame bajar (de tu espalda). pusi, yare ta ithopramari (mit. sin. ): hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

add, put on top of. pehithe.

and then she returned. e he tatoprou ha koroni.

returned. tatoprou.

I put the wapu fruits in to soak. wapu ya ki he paoai.

I will cover the wapu fruits with water (while they are cooking). wapu ya ki he paopei.

to submerge. paoprou.

Bat went to stick (along a tree trunk). hewe ke a wãri re sutiketayowei.

said of the grains of certain grasses that get caught in cotton, fabric or leg hair. suti.

I go. mi hinowe.

not. mi.

became terrifying. no kirihiprou.

send your mother to harvest corn where that tree whose top protrudes (in relation to the surrounding vegetation). kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami e moku nape ta shimiki.

to have the protruding tip (in height). shorokoa.

he skinned it immediately while it was squealing in vain. a si yoai re shoapariyonowei a ma miyomiyomou petao tehe.

he skinned it immediately. shoapariyonowei.

he gets angry only with his wife. pe suwepi ke iha a kahiki shiro kushetou.

to open the mouth (of an animal), to part the lips (to speak); to threaten the weak and remain silent before others. kushetou.

they kicked the excrements. kohoromi shipe kayoamahe.

to kick, reject or displace with the foot. kayorei.

I'm going to slap you. pe si poararei.

to hit someone once with the flat part of a machete; to slap someone once. poararei.

to lose or throw away several objects successively. hoyaakei.

scratch oneself once with a. hãsikio.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to hold or brandish something above one. yareherei.

ya reconocí la planta de los y a w a r i. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena no ihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a no ihip ia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo no i hi pia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. iai.

later hokosiyoma will follow (the other hekura). waiha hokosiyoma a notioyorupe (cha.

will follow later. notioyorupe.

he asked the woman to spread her legs, then he fished hungry caribes of meat where they were gathered (in the vagina). suwe ke a ha wayakamakini, siparariwe ke ki naikiri mi puruhou yaiope ha ki yokama (mit.

to open, to spread apart. wayaka.

to be very curved along its entire length. hishokowe.

(interjection expressing hitting a target with a bamboo arrow). tisi.

to hit a target with a bamboo arrow (ruhu masi). tisi.

bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

slightly curved, having a slightly curved shape. parokorayou.

the canoe is corroded in parts by rot. kanawa a repisi.

to be thinner due to rust, decomposition or use; to become thinner, corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisi.

(synonym of ihirupi). horoto.

tomorrow I will go hunting, I am fed up with staying (here). henaha ya rãmi huatarotayope, ya kuo mohipraruhe.

to be fed up with a situation, to lose the desire to work, to get tired of a job. mohipraruhe.

certain parts of the roots emerge from the soil surface. hii nasiki pe urea.

to partially emerge. ureamai.

to tear or rip lengthwise, to cut or tear an incomplete strip along the edge of an object. sheririai.

do not tell me what others say and do. kamiye iha pe ã pakihatihe.

do not tell me what others say and do. pakihatihe.

you have to light the fire. wa wake ha paramapani.

indicates that what is produced has something to do with a center or with the speaker (or with some of their very personal possessions), with fire, water, above or below. -mapariyo.

to untie, to open. mi hape.

to untie, to open. hape.

to be very suffocated, to be exhausted. wãshimi hikiniwe.

to be squeezed together (elongated objects). hikiniwe.

bot. oroshomi thotho.

small gourds in which the ashes of the dead are sometimes kept. oroshomi.

to shorten, to shrink. hokataai.

to do this energetically. yaisiprai.

we climbed a small mountain and then changed slopes. hehu a wai hami yamaki ha yãmothoni, yamaki mi rakipariyoma.

to pass from one slope to another when on a hill or mountain; to turn over, change sides, turn one. rakiai.

they loved each other and lay down together in the same hammock without anyone noticing. ke kipi nohimayoma, ke kipi yakao hãthooma.

lying down, reclined. yakaprawe.

the souls danced one after the other. porepore pe praiai mi hetuoma.

we will come to you dancing (said by the hekura spirits to the initiate). yamaki niya praiai re heaimi ye.

to dance in succession, take turns dancing. praiai.

ticks. ki ha patakini, the pe rãtãrãtãprarou (mit. she puts on the ground the container that holds them and (you see them) swarming. ).

ticks. patakini.

to cure a seriously ill person. kaihamai.

to place two long objects next to each other. waririai.

his father-in-law followed him immediately. pe shii re e nohãã shoakei.

you, follow us. kahe a ta noh ã i k u.

he arrived after your departure. pei wa nohã ha a kopei kuroi.

to follow, walk behind. nohã.

honey, slightly sour, of the hãshã ãshi na bee. hãsha.

to sin. monarimi.

I am going to eat. mamohiyomi.

water. ayara.

What relation of kinship do you have with my younger brother, to whom I give shelter. kihi feesheye ya nohi re thaapraiwei iha, weti naha wa e kuu totihia kurawe.

my younger male relative, my younger brother. eesheye.

how abundant the tapir tracks could be. are pe mãyo heherama.

to exaggerate, to boast (about one. feharai.

(he/she) speaks upriver. prukuimi ãsi.

upriver (speech). prukuimi.

to stumble, to falter (from the effect of a load). tihop r a o.

to sink, to crumble, to fall to the ground (from weakness when one is sick, from the weight of a load). tihop.

he left. a ha ipire.

to go, to leave. ipire-.

dubitative modality. sihewe.

hard, tough. tiiwe.

to fall one after another (fruits). shithãprou.

as there is mud everywhere, I do not want to stay here. the pe ãhiãhipi ha ya kuo puhiomi ke a tharei.

to stay, to remain. puhiomi.

everywhere the measles epidemic was decimating/making the Yanomami disappear. wara re si wayuni yãnomãmi re the ki mrao piyekeo totihiomopotayoma.

currently everywhere people are in scarcity. hei tehe pe the pe oheo totihiomopotayou.

they were disappearing/dying everywhere (due to an epidemic). totihiomopotayoma.

to speak with a distinct accent or dialect different from the local speech. ãhiãmo.

to wait for the death of an animal. nomamarei.

he put stones to plug the holes, but the water eroded the earth all around (and made them fall). maa ke mape ma hikiãprarai pea ma kure, ma pe hishiatarama.

the water eroded/undermined the earth all around. hishiatarama.

sources of the Kootopiwei river. kootopiwei u heki ha thomiriyoma.

river name. kootopiwei.

yes. hão.

we form a circle. mi hetutuai.

to form a circle. hetutuai.

one is still missing. ai a no shoawe.

axes are very expensive. hãyokoma pe no pruka.

the. no.

I slipped on the mud. ãhiãhi pe ha ya kaherayoma.

to make someone slide by pushing them; to slide (several objects). kahemai.

to be doing it (painting a curved line on the face). hiporoshimou.

to darken (perfective inceptive). ruwerayou.

the tábanos (horseflies) have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahaakei.

saltarín, poseedor de mostacillas, cruza un collar alrededor de mi pecho, yo me engalanaré ante aquélla que, allá abajo, tiene hendido el extremo de un poste de su casa. kihi a no topepi re niyaope, weti ipa e ki ta yakirapari, kihi totahi re sheteterati ke ki iha, ya ki kãi ta huyamou ta yaio.

to be cracked, to be separated (end of a long object). shetetamai.

to inform, to tell someone where something is located. yimira.

he was lost on the path, when he saw Cachicamo cola desnuda. a ha mohoruherini, moro a tarareherima.

was lost on the path. mohoruherini.

give me one too. ipa ai ta shererepa.

why don't you give me some wood. wama the ãsho pe wai hore sherereaimi yaro.

to divide for taking a part for oneself. sherererei.

to fart (once) in someone's face. mi horaprai: lanzar un pedo (una vez) en la cara de alguien.

to fart (once) in someone. horaprai.

(related form of yakeke). si yakeke.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). naasi.

to heal; to stop. yokekeai.

traigan aquí (en el lomo) una piel de tangará (de la especie h e h e h e m i) procedente de los Waika. waika hehehemi e siki ta yehimaparihe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

tangará; Tangara sp. (Thraupidae). hehehemi.

I will leave tomorrow (with my hammock, to sleep elsewhere). henaha ya hokeheripe.

they have just left the dwelling to go live elsewhere. hei tehe pe hokerayoherima.

to abandon the dwelling or camp (taking one. hoke.

grab plantains and eat them (each one on their own). pei ke wama the ãsiki ha toani, the ta waapotuhe.

eat (each one on their own). waapotuhe.

Guamo tree. thibaudiana.

he called his wife urgently. uslos.

he called his wife urgently. uslos.

the ground broke after having sunk gradually (possibly as a result of an earthquake). a pitha re hetiriherihe, a pitha pata re rairaipraruhe ye e.

to sink gradually (due to successive and progressive movements). rairaipraruhe.

who (participates) also. weti sho.

my son, who are you in love with. oãsi weti sho ke waheki nohimayou.

also, too, as well. sho.

the sky darkened gradually. the mi ruweaherii.

the sky darkened gradually. ruweaherii.

he rubbed the ground with his foot to remove the dead leaves, carefully uncovering the ground. yãã ke the henaki hore ha hãrãrukuni, the ha roshitaakuni.

small, to scratch or uncover the ground with the foot to . hãrãruma.

standing one next to the other. fupraa thãririã.

standing. fupraa.

to fall gravely ill. reirayou.

push the embers towards the center of the fire. koã ãshoku hiruru.

push towards center. hiruru.

to be crowded for a moment. hithokotou.

I did not sleep during the night. ya mamo he wakararayoma.

I did not sleep during the night. wakararayoma.

to be capable of spitting magic plants or pathogenic objects. pehithepraai.

you have avenged your relative (by killing a person who belongs to the same community as the killer). e naha re a hiima kuwe wama a koã waikirema.

to avenge a dead relative by killing a member of the killer. waikirema.

he is happy. reroma kosihi.

to be happy. reroma.

go and kill it (by shooting arrows at it). a ta niyapraharu.

to go and do something. -aharayo-.

to make yellow, to let burn; to make a hammock turn yellow, unintentionally, by hanging it too close to the fire. frãrããmai.

Shapo konayoma (a female spirit) sat near me farting. shapo konayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, a shiã keyeheroma (cha.

farts. pedos.

they are all present in a house or camp. weti ipa a totoa ta fenapa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. They are there. ): vienda o en un campamento.

to be present. faii.

they wear old worn-out loincloths. wayuko yãpishipi pe rapouhe.

to deteriorate (a fabric). yãpishiprou.

¿cuándo, en qué momento. weti ke tehe.

when, at what moment. tehe.

to place oneself along an elongated object, to lean against an elongated object. hiriki.

(he) had left small piles of chewed wood in all the places where (he) had gone. hii ke the hi pe wãri hore wakoka no hiraatarama.

in all the places where (he/she/it) had gone. hiraatarama.

the ancestors did not get down (from their hammocks) because they were afraid of him. poreri pe ithopronomi pe ha kirini.

they did not get down (from their hammocks). ithopronomi.

to smear with. kamiãi.

to climb quickly. torereai.

to hold or carry an object by grasping it with the hand. humirei.

to get fat/big (living being). huteherayou.

hekurayoma peni pei yo oni wathaperamai re kooimahei (cha. hekurayoma peni pei yo oni wathaperamai re kooimahei (cha. ): here the female hekura once again direct their paths towards us, and adorn them reproducing the motifs of the sleepy snake. ): he aquí que las mujeres hekura nuevamente dirigen sus caminos hacia nosotros, y los adornan reproduciendo los motivos de la serpiente dormilona.

female shamans. hekurayoma.

he returned to his house. kama ke e shapono hami a koprou shoarayoma.

his. e.

to have repeated a message verbatim without mistakes. sharirikei.

the váquiros were getting close to the place where we were ambushed. yamaki re reayoruawei ha ware ke pe ki pata re titetoyoruperei.

to get close to. titeteprou.

to fill. hayaro.

they gathered/collected perhaps a package of magical substances. heri pe hãro norãmi hokeremahe.

they gathered/collected. hokeremahe.

a small, silvery fish with a reddish belly from the Characid family, full of spines and used as bait by fishermen. misi iyeiyerimi.

they separated going backwards. the pe tikukuprou mi ha yaparoni.

he gets angry for no reason. a hushuo si ihehewe.

to do something in reverse, to go back to a previous state. a.

itheri vb. itheri vb. trans. trans. t itheriai: 1. t itheriai: 1. To add something on top of the load of a basket; to add an object to another that has just been offered, to give in addition. Añadir algo encima de la carga de una cesta; añadir un objeto a otro que se acaba de ofrecer, dar además.

to add. añadir.

to stop feeling friendship for someone. puhi shomi.

Baba used to go to the forest to cook her packages of caterpillars on the embers. iwariweni urihi hami kasha e hãro ripipraai yaimoma.

had the habit of, used to. aimoma.

fruit of the shirihari tree. shirihari.

where (is it). weti hami.

where the one X's mouth calls father is (lit. X kahiki re hiimouwei.

where is it said to be (on the ground). weti the re kure hami the hoã praa.

where. hami.

to leave too much water inside the tobacco when preparing a wad. uweamai.

plant used to make cords. yamaa.

dead and hard wood; wood that does not rot. amahi.

do not attack us. matihe.

do not attack us. matihe.

who are you, that you have a breath that smells like a woman's sex. weti wa mishiãki ni moshiri reprou ayarayou ta kuhawe (cha. (= who are you, who, pretending to be a shaman, nevertheless make love to women) (the shaman detected that smell while in a trance). ).

to have the smell of a woman who has just had sex. kuhawe.

you, you are content with eating (alone) little by little the wapu fruits. kaheni wapu wa ki wapraai poo e.

you (pl) do not matter to me. k ahe wamaki kuo poo.

to do (without caring about the consequences), to do (without apparent reason); to be content with. wapraai.

to separate for a moment. shekeretou.

he would very much like to exchange his sister for another woman (= he would very much like to give his sister as a wife to a man in exchange for another woman to marry). pe yai a nomihãi shi toprao.

to exchange, to trade, to swap, to substitute, to relieve, to follow in succession. nomihãi.

to get one or more blisters on the hand. fimiki si thoroho.

to get a blister in a specific place. thorohokei.

to be located in several places. rãikikiwe.

the man went in company with the winged termites (mixed with the winged termites). thapoimi kutaeni.

to mix, intermingle different objects. thapoimi.

I am better now, my health continues to improve little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to begin to fly (a bird), to recover from an illness, to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). herehai.

a dull roar came from the mosquito nest. peti naki no yaripi rororomoma.

to make a dull roaring sound (like a fire burning, wind in the trees, etc.). rororomou.

to be outside (plural objects). sipoprawe.

to divide into several groups. shetekerariyo.

you have been pregnant, soon your belly will grow. wa shipenarayoma hei tehe wa maka isipariyo (mit.

stomach, belly. maka.

to be sick, to be infected by shawara (evil spirits). awarapi.

sobresalir, inflarse, hincharse. tiyeriai.

cuando tenían hambre, preparaban frutos wapu (mezclándolos con agua), y se los daban de comer (de manera regular). oheo ke tehe wapu ke a thaheni upe koapramahe.

es por temor a las picazón que producen los piojos que ellos se afeitan la cabeza. noma pe no shiki kiri ha thaheni pe he mãrokoshipramai.

to consume, to eat, to feed. thaheni.

while they were holding Hokotoyoma, they were scraping his skin. hokotoyoma a huwepipou tehe, a hoãpii re kukeiwei (mit.

to hold, immobilize (with the hand). huwepipou.

when you see the enemy warriors you will feel seized by terror. wayu wa pe taprai tehe wa ãmoku keprariyo.

feeling of horror, of terror; being stunned. keprariyo.

I'm not going near, I'm going to live in the forest. ya aheteomi, wãyumi ke ya ayou.

To what place did they go to camp in the forest. weti hami pei the pe wãyumi ayou kuhe.

To abandon the permanent dwelling to go live in the forest for a time. fwã-.

we were close to the goal when we regrouped on a rocky hill. yamaki ahetou tehe pei maki ha yamaki hirakema.

to be gathered, to be grouped together. hirakema.

share your tobacco wad with me. pee nahe ta hakopa.

to take tobacco from someone else. hakorei.

while Oso hormiguero (Oso hormiguero) was going around, the woman returned directly (to her house). teperiwe ke a wãri shokekou hoo tehe poreriyoma a katitia re korãyoheriiwei.

she returned directly (to her house). korãyoheriiwei.

deer. yora.

to be dispersed in the forest in various camps. kasihiwe.

I was so angry that I sat for a long time. ya hushuopi kãi rotaoma.

the (bird) stayed seated in the same place for a long time, in plain sight. wa weto ha ke the pata rotaoma.

to sit, to be seated. rotaoma.

Bat split firewood by striking it against the ground. heweni koã ãsho yahekikema.

bat. heweni.

to deepen the interior of an object, to make a cavity deeper. koeheai.

I made many paujíes (birds) fly up. paruri ya pe shuriramama.

to make (birds) fly up in large numbers. shuriramama.

adolescent bird. koriroma.

I eat a yuvía (fruit). hawari ya koko oai.

bite my nose. yare hu ta opari.

to eat (something crunchy), to bite (a more or less spherical object), to break with the teeth (a spherical object). anaki.

put yourself for a moment in the center of the group (or: put yourself for a moment in the central plaza). a mi ta tharitaru.

put yourself for a moment in the center of the group (or: put yourself for a moment in the central plaza). tharitaru.

my ear got blocked (after taking a hallucinogen). ya hiyokaki ka komãkema.

to obstruct, block, clog, jam, stuff. atas-.

to walk rapidly for some time, to start walking rapidly. ropatou.

even though it is very far away, bring me water from the middle of the waterfall (= give me a pot). mithari a pora ma yaferii ha, weti ipa a pora ta yakepa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

distant, far away. yaheriwe.

to be completely cracked or split open. thepahaprou.

(he) tied the legs of the tapir in pairs (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie the legs of an animal in pairs to carry it on the back. warekema.

I have the feeling that an abscess is forming. yuu a nami kumou.

to form, to construct a temporary shelter. kumou.

to frequently get tongue-tied while speaking. aka hãrehewe.

to get tongue-tied, to stammer. hãrehe.

the final phase. aheprariyo.

to suspend cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry them. shinari uku rukekeai.

to suspend cotton fibers on a crossbar to dry them. rukekeai.

yãnomãmi the hekurapini, ira kahiki wãsipipramai tikorayoma (mit. yãnomãmi the hekurapini, ira kahiki wãsipipramai tikorayoma (mit. ): to the jaguar's misfortune, the shaman managed, thanks to the power of his hekura, to shrink the beast's snout. ): para desgracia del jaguar, el chamán logró, gracias al poder de sus hekura , achicar el hocico de la ﬁera.

set of shamans. hekurapi.

a younger girl than the speaker (male or female): a daughter, a sister, a parallel cousin or any young girl to whom one wants to show affection. nakasimi.

I'm no longer a little one (humorous antithesis, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

little chick, little bird that still doesn. makamakapi.

name given to various ferns, among others Metaxia rostrata, Triplophyllum funestum and Selaginella parkeri were identified. moimoi.

to crush or flatten something completely with the incisors. washishirei.

to make tobacco spicy by preparing it properly. nakiprou.

(he) provoked the wind to make a humming sound. pei maki no yaripi ma rororomou.

irritate, bother, annoy; provoke wind. yaripi.

to attract someone. sukusukumorayou.

funeral pyre, oblique pole in temporary shelter roof. yaritha.

to speak. taparu.

mantener los ojos vueltos o en blanco. mamoku si poruhu.

to keep the eyes turned or blank. poruhou.

to cough. thokomou.

to be wrinkled or crumpled in a place. ãpretea.

to become cloudy, to become foggy. ihirashipiprou.

he made a detour and passed under the roof of the house, near the place where the hammocks are hung. pe pariherii tehe shapori a sipoo ha re nahi pariki hami e ãyoherima.

made a detour and passed under the roof of the house, near the place where the hammocks are hung. pariherii.

to start, to begin. hãrãruprai.

they told me not to do it. yare wasirema.

they told me not to do it. wasirema.

however the tree is and also it can be The word 'tehe' in Yanomami means 'now, immediately'. ya tupei kuroi: sin embargo el árbol es.

tree. tehe.

to start exercising a twisting motion by means of a loop made with a twisted vine, in order to break or grab. yãmoniprai.

Mujer-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyomani yorehi si patetepoma.

he quickly gathered a white stone and threw it at Mujer-picure. kakuruma a ha hoketarini, thomiriyoma a sheyeprarema.

Woman-picure (a name). Mujer-picure.

however we managed to move away. yamaki prahaa he yatirayoherii.

did you move away. wa praharayou kuhe.

to be far. praha.

the fish is placed on the leaf. yãã ke henaki hami yuri a paa.

to be placed, to be located. paa.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to hold the arms above the head with the palms of the hands turned outward, to avoid an accident; to hold the hand in front of oneself to protect oneself. rerekou.

they (the two) took her, placed themselves on each side and slowly brought her to solid ground. a re huwepireiwei, ke kipi mi therehetariyowei, opi a kãi re washiripikeiwei.

to surround, to encircle (someone or something). huwepireiwei.

to be full, to be satiated. potehai.

a dull roar came from the mosquito nest. peti naki no yaripi rororomoma.

to make a dull roaring sound (like a fire burning, wind in the trees, etc.). rororomou.

tamandua (anteater). shokro.

null. fereremi.

the nutria had curled up in a place where the high part of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to curl up, to be curled up at the bottom of something. hikoo.

to be a little long (arrow). tirehewe.

Horonãmi carried a tapir on his back, on one side of the tapir he had added a collared peccary, and on the other a deer. horonãmi shama a yehipoma, kama roroku ha poshe a yetemakema, ai ke a roroku hami preãri a yetemakema.

1. Add, append. 2. Marry a second wife; make one. yeteamai.

to make love one after the other. wamopraai.

to draw a transverse line. yãprutakei.

(funny): to place the feet pointing towards the fire to warm them. fmamisiki yehitao.

toenails; claws of the hind legs; claws of a bird of prey. fmamisiki.

viscous, sticky. yoriki.

I went several times to look for poles and my shoulder did not hurt, I brought all that I needed. hãto yama nahi ha thatathatataani, nimoko ya hako niniprou mai ha.

to feel pain. niniã.

to widen (a cavity), to enlarge (a surface). hauhamai.

we used to pass by here when we went to harvest plantains. eyemi re yamaki ha kupraani, kuratha yama pe tepraai.

there, downstream, is the place where they have the habit of fishing. kihi koro totihi ha, yuri pe re kãprããi totihiowehei ha.

to have the habit of doing something in the same place. kupraani.

vessel with a long, slender, somewhat curved neck. orakama.

while we were detained in this place, Pas. heha yamaki uprao tehe pas. (personal name) fell seriously ill. a he parohai ayakei.

to fall seriously ill. parohoprou.

to purify by means of a liquid. epuriﬁcar.

while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk. ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei.

to make swell, to make dilate. hirimai.

to slowly extinguish, to go out little by little (a fire). wãnonou.

it's going to rain heavily. maa a sutarayou.

to become dense, thick, heavy (in the center of something); to rain heavily. sutarayou.

to make inferior to, to make smaller than; to place closer to a certain limit. haweheamai.

to arrive at the center one after the other. tharipraai.

to chop down a tree, to cut a tree. theetheemo.

fish, guabina; Erythrinus erythrinus (Erythrinidae). ishawe.

he went to get worms in a place where there were many rocks, he also got a termite nest (for fishing bait). maa ke ma hothothomope hami e shipe ha torarini, ãrepo konaki kãi thama.

a place where there were many rocks. hothothomope.

magnificent, Dormilona swayed in the middle of the group. wathaperariwe re a noshi harirawe krei kupariyoma.

the noise of branches broken by the storm was heard. fwatori pe pata re kreikreimoperei.

sway, rock, tilt forward and backward; stagger, lean, slump down abruptly (often in a threatening manner). krei.

went to the place where rises the Mount-of-the-woman-who-has-her-period. re uprayahi ha, suwe ke the yipimoma.

rises. uprayahi.

to have the fingers spread apart. hauhuo.

to be of a fragile or brittle nature. yerirou.

to float. potai.

you have seen the hekura, but they have not appreciated you (they did not come to lodge in your chest). hekura wa the pe hore tararema ma kui, wa nohiãnomihe (cha.

to come to love, to appreciate. nohiãi.

thread for attaching feathers to arrows. haomamotima.

Dioclea guianensis (Leg. kuhãwe hakosi.

tree. hakosi.

to have recovered from the effects of a hallucinogen. wakakarayou.

the opening of the basket is narrower than its base. yorehi si ka iyoyowe.

to make a container whose opening is narrower than the base. iyoyoai.

to split a tobacco leaf in half lengthwise following the central vein, for the purpose of gifting half of it. pee nahe repokosikei.

to split a tobacco leaf in half lengthwise following the central vein, for the purpose of gifting half of it. repokosikei.

they got up one after the other from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

to start to get up one after the other and leave the house together (group of people). weyoyotou.

the ripe plantain smelled good, he cut and ate several pieces with his incisors and finished it. kuratha a ni kreteri ha a ha weheriararini, a mi watherema.

to eat quickly. weheriarei.

vacillated, hesitated (perfective). wekekerayou.

to take or obtain a large quantity. hothetherei.

the salt is put into the cooking water. sayu the keamamou.

to be put into water for cooking. keamamou.

I, when I kill a peccary, transport it whole and that's how I carry it. kamiyeni ware ya pe pata ha niyaprani, ya pe pata ma re tirorotamayoruu tharei.

to hang at a low height. niyaprani.

to think of something else. shomirariyo.

chisel or burin made with a wooden handle and an incisor of the peccary. thenaki.

to participate in a ceremonial dialogue. wayamou.

to participate in a ceremonial dialogue. wayamo.

peeled the cambur fruit and opened it in two to see if it contained seeds. wake e ha roshiprarini, pei re moku kua ha mini, e ka eririprarema.

peeled (it). roshiprarini.

each time he approached the two women, they moved away to avoid him. suwe ke kipi the wãri hore pakihiaprarope hami ke kipi hãroãpraroma.

to avoid (someone/something). pakihiaprarope.

to have painted oneself with round spots in that manner. hikikiprou.

immortal people who live underground (like amahi wood, which does not rot). akrehe.

I'm going to touch your nose with the glans. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

to touch with the glans. tiprusha.

to fabricate a straight/rectilinear object. shaririprai.

the cat sharpens its claws. ini imisiki namo thao.

to sharpen a stick, stake, piece of wood. namo thaprai.

to decide. namo.

the fish pulls the fishing line or thread slightly several times (with little force). yuri a ikoikomou.

to pull slightly several times. iko-.

we two (masculine) will go there. vikamiye pehekini pehe kipi niyapraama.

we two (masculine). vikamiye.

I'm going to break firewood by kicking it. koã ya ãsho kahekirarei.

hold him down on the ground, I'm going to break his kidneys with a heel strike. mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo ya mi wãri ta kahekipra ke.

to break under the weight of something (a rigid object). kahekiprou.

to take out several parts of a whole to offer them to several people. shetekeakei.

beetle larva. purima hiki.

chick, fledgling. harukupiai.

offer the other arrows. fei ai ki re kui e ki ta totoku.

offer. totoku.

the path divides into several others. yo shererewe.

divided into several parts. shererewe.

they are making arrows. porepore ke pe re hirapiyei hami yãnora.

arrow. yãnora.

when they were doing that, they dropped (the basket), and it transformed into a rahara monster. thamapii tehe, a ha huhepirini rahara ki pata kuprou shoarayoma (mit.

to drop, to let fall. thamapii.

knot in the wood. fhi moshoko.

knot. moshokore.

they were shelling corn. yono mo pe hushima- yopra- he.

to shell, to remove kernels from cob. hushima-.

I have the habit of entering (tree trunks) to eat my. kamiye pei ke ya ha rukeoproherini, puu ya u pe waaprai tharei.

to have the habit of entering/penetrating. rukeoprou.

to lose or throw away several objects successively. yaakei.

not fear receiving blows, face an adversary, present oneself after a threat to defy the one who made it. shemokei.

to have several holes. tiroshowe.

We arrived at the shapono. shapono ha, prohu.

to arrive at a dwelling, to reach a destination. peripraiwei.

to tear or rip longitudinally (terminative form). sheririprou.

quickly, he hung the hammock he was carrying in the open air, and lay down for a while. thoo thoku re yehiponowei the ki ha hakokotakini a peritaoma.

hung (a hammock) in the open air. yehiponowei.

(synonym). kakomã.

no, I don't eat that. maa, ya the waimi.

to eat. waimi.

manufactured object, object that comes from foreigners (during a ceremonial speech). nape itho to manufacturado, objeto que proviene de exvb.

he who behaves like a "White" (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). hei a re napemope (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

foreign, white, non-Yanomami. nape.

to move through dense vegetation and not be visible. hithetherayou.

the arrows that the ancestors shot fell short (the arrows fell without reaching the target). poreri pe sherekapi hawepraai yaioma (mit.

to fall short, to not reach the target. hawepraai.

put yourself. ponte.

to bend, to yield under a load. pashokoai.

he felt bliss and sat on the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

to feel complete satisfaction or bliss, to be happy. totihitariyoma.

a small recent vine was hanging along (the hole) where Rabipelado had taken refuge. nãro a re titia totihiawei ha, ihami thoo ke e thotho wai tuku re wariripeheriiwei (mit.

to hang or be hanging along something in the same direction. totihiawei.

he made love silently, without anyone noticing. mamikai ke te pata nihorotaa ha hãthomakini.

to make love silently, without anyone noticing. nihorot.

they (the hekura) have seized the evil (in the chest of the sick person). a wayu re huweparihahei (cha.

they (the hekura) have seized the evil (in the chest of the sick person). huweparihahei.

my brother-in-law went with the others to look for water at the time when we were still far from the river. parawa ke u wai owetao tehe shoriweni mãu ke u mi nami re hua narerayouwei.

we were far away. narerayouwei.

I will not stay quiet, I will go live elsewhere. ya he ononoo totihio mai ke the.

to raise the nose to sniff. hiyokaki mi nonoo.

then, Jaguar raised its head (towards him). pata nonotou re shoarayonowei.

to be quiet; not to take the time to do something; to raise the nose/head to sniff/look up. nonoo.

recover, get better after being seriously ill. horu.

abscesses or boils. yuupiprou.

to transport without effort a heavy load. herehepou.

to become beautiful, splendid. wãrishanaai.

For the central Yanomami, it is the set of communities that live in the Parima Sierra towards the sources of the puutha ke u (lit.: Honey River). In that region there is an evangelical mission. For a long time the Parahiri were at war with certain communities belonging to the central Yanomami, for example the Maiyo theri.. Parahiri.

a mosquito stung me. ukushini yare hiirema.

to sting. picahihuprou.

canoe too heavily loaded, when the water reaches near its edges. iheteteprou.

they break easily. se rompen fácilmente.

break. rompen.

to smile. kasi wateai.

to smile. wateai.

the mature pijiguaos hang in numerous low clusters from the palm stems. heãhu wake yakrikriwe totihiwe.

to be of a light tint; mature pijiguaos whose skin is lighter. heãhu.

fat, big (living being). hutehewe.

when they had resurrected, they got up quickly. the pe horiã ha hititiraruni, the pe hoketama.

they had resurrected. hititiraruni.

the child is full from the breast. fihiru a hiekea.

the tree was like that when I climbed it. e naha hi kuo tehe ya tupei ma kuroi.

to fill up to the brim. hiekea.

there is a wide open space (in the middle of the vegetation). the ka yakeo prahawe.

we left the arrow canes (to dry in the sun) in a place where the trees left a piece of sky uncovered. the misi ka yakeo kuope ha yama pe shereka ropramai.

to have slid through vegetation (perfective form). yakerayou.

Rabipelado simply disappeared behind the house. nãroriwe shikã hami ke a wãri mratou re perayoherinowei.

they precipitated crying. priririaprarou.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax between his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to squeeze, crush or press something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to extract juice from fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held in the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. hushiki.

he shot an arrow at a little bird and it got stuck (in the tree). kirithami a pehi ha niyakini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot at a target. napemou.

to be hungry. shenini.

to fulfill a blood vengeance, to kill to avenge a homicide; to rebel (verbally), to respond to an insult. nohi peye.

there where the váquiros move, in the very center of the herd, the wind blows and brushes against them. ware ke ki kuaape hami, mi ãmo totihi hami, watori ke e mãririwe totihii.

to move, to go, to displace. kuaape.

they performed the dance of presentation and night fell. the pe ha praiarini, the mi titirayom a.

the dance of presentation. praiarini.

plural object. thorohai.

to cry for a dead person (lit: to throw mucus). fishihipi hoyai.

to have a runny nose, to have a cold. fishihipi.

that has hurt me. ya hamirayoma.

that has hurt me. hamirayoma.

to defecate with one's back to the house where one lives, while watching the surroundings (when an attack is feared). kohesi mi yairayou.

pubis, pelvic bone, iliac bone; in birds: bony structure comprising the pubis and ilium. yairayou.

they (two) supported the scaffold on the sharp edge of Mount Sipara. sipara ke V.

edge, sharp edge. reiawei.

they loved each other and lay down together in the same hammock without anyone noticing. ke kipi nohimayoma, ke kipi yakao hãthooma.

lying down, reclined. yakaprawe.

don't you see that I'm silent because of the gossip that one keeps hearing. wã the kahiki eemou tapraimi ha totihii, wãno ke pe hiriãprai ha.

to perceive a distant noise. hiriãprai.

to paint several circles on the body. tipikiprou.

barely red. manashi momihiwe.

red, reddish. momih.

to make frequent mistakes when speaking; to get tongue-tied repeatedly during a ceremonial dialogue. aka hãrohãi.

to make a mistake or get tongue-tied when speaking; to have a slip of the tongue. hãro.

he peeled the ripe cambur and looked if it had seeds. tate e ha roshipraruni, pei re moku kua mima.

to remove the outer layer (of an object). roshikei.

to strike blows on top, to drive in. pasuu.

to have divided/split/forked (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb . pakararayou.

he hurried as soon as night began to fall. pe the ka mi wai suprahatou tehe a wãri re horeprarouwei.

to be almost night, to be a little dark. supraha.

to be hard, solid, firm. rohotha.

fear will make me turn my face (ceremonial dialogue). ya kiriri mi huruprarou kukei (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to turn one. huruprarou.

for. por.

(upriver dialect). hohorimi (habla de río arriba.

variety of banana; Musa paradisiaca (Musaceae). hohorimi.

¿están ustedes pintados y adornados. wamaki paushimoã haikiprariyo ta kuhawe.

to be adorned and painted. paushimorãyou.

to remain still for a moment (an animal). hothoprao.

he placed the arrows on the ground abruptly. shereka ke ki re pratakeiwei.

to place something on the ground suddenly or abruptly. pratakei.

I trace a line with onoto across my forehead. ya huko tiwaroo.

to paint a curved line from one ear to the other across the forehead. huko*.

to put bamboo (plural object, perfective). hitotorarei.

as it was night fall, those who went hunting shouted to be fetched. the pe rãmi re huonowei, the mi ka supre ha:"wamare ta koreyo she", pe komima.

night fall. huonowei.

to have placed long objects next to each other (perfective of waririmai). waririmakei.

they registered the shore entirely. weyoweyo ke a hititipraremahe.

they consumed/exhausted/registered entirely. hititipraremahe.

to have the custom of offering boiled plantains to others. weyepou.

they have accompanied them. pe yaurayoherii ke a kuhe.

they have accompanied them. yaurayoherii.

to constitute several groups of people or gathered objects. kãprãwe.

to rub slices. hirikiãi.

plumage (of a chick). yahoprou.

while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk. ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei.

to make swell, to make dilate. hirimai.

it is said that they were accompanied back by the people of Shashanawe. shashanawe theri peni pe ãhã peratayomahe.

receive what has been brought. perapei.

before these trees are cut down we will gather the seeds (of the hallucinogenic hisiomi) and inhale them. temi re hi uprao tehe peheki ha hãmoãrini, pehe a koararei.

to gather, to collect. temi.

I passed by their garden. kama pe hikaripi theka hami ya hayuoma.

I passed by. hayuoma.

it had to pass a long time before the ground recovered its firmness, then they descended again. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma (mit.

to become firm, to straighten up (a baby); to recover strength after an illness, initiation, or after participating in the unokaimou ritual. hiyakaai.

towards him/her/it. kakekuhacia.

go downriver to look for cambur palm fruits, carrying the bunch in your hand. tapitapirimi ke ki ta yepikirio.

To lift; to carry in the hand (with the arm hanging down). yepikei.

to paint one. raokoprou.

parrot; it repeats everything it hears. werehiriwe.

to take or give two objects. horokorei.

to collapse, to crumble. krããse.

it's going to rain hard. maa a niya sutai.

rains very hard. sutai.

to become slippery (inside of an object) (perfective). takrarayou.

he broke open an ant nest (konakona) with his hand. konakona pe pesi kerema.

I pulled up an ãtãri shrub, breaking it with my hand. ãtãri ya ãhi kerema.

I gather cassava roots (pulling them out with my hand). nashi ya koko keai.

to take/pick for oneself in that manner; to do this without delay. kerema.

I will get myself cured (a wound). ya herimamou.

what is coated with a black resin (the inside of a gourd). no ushimamou.

cassava flour is toasted (to make cassava bread). nashi hi rãmamou.

the bow is properly tensioned. hãto nahi iyomamou totihitawe.

to get something done to oneself, to have something habitually done, intrinsic quality of an object. herimamou.

allomorph of rati in derived forms. ratu.

to paint several motifs, to paint motifs over the entirety of a surface. yãhirimai.

I wait for the manioc to mature before eating it. nashi ya koko etemai.

to let mature before consuming (manioc or ocumo). etemai.

tira los chinchorros vacíos (de los hekura que se han ido), inhala alucinógenos, que los chamanes tracen un nuevo camino (para los h e k u r a) y tú te pondrás pesado otra vez (= los hekura volverán a alojarse en tu cuerpo). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

to make heavy, to cause to become heavy. hutepramai.

Tuqueque arrived when they were crying for the dead. the pe puhi kãi upraai tehe refariwe e kopema.

to cry for the dead. puhi kãi upraai.

the kinkajou's shaman. hãshoriwe hekura.

mythological ancestor of the kinkajou. hãshoriwe.

change the subject of a conversation. hãroo.

I dropped the machete. sipara ya huherema.

I let it fall. ya the huherema.

to drop, to let fall an object held in the hand. huhei.

to have crumbled/collapsed (perfective aspect of an inchoative verb). hashishirayou.

(As) he really knew tobacco, he asked: "Don't you lack tobacco. pɨɨ nahe tai yaia yaro, e the wãrima: "pei re wa fori re ke. ". ".

to lack, to be in need of (something). fori.

to start smoothing or homogenizing a liquid. kopeheprai.

jo, let me descend (from your back). pusi, yare ta ithopramari.

to make descend, to let descend (someone whom one is carrying). ithopramari.

to become oblong; to elongate slightly. torohou.

cave or shallow burrow. kotakaa.

to start repairing a broken arrow by shortening it. hatakaprai.

to be clearly distinguished (noise, voice), to be heard clearly. wã yawereai.

to be heard for a moment (noise). wã yaweretou.

1. to be clearly distinguished (noise, voice), to be heard clearly; 2. to be clear (noise). yawere.

(habla del sur del Orinoco. hãto nahitha si potehe.

to tense, to become satiated. poteheai.

to be leaning against each other (elongated objects). hirikiwe.

a type of plant or tree. ãshihi.

to shorten something. onohokei.

he imitates his father (= he behaves like his father). pe hii a owepou.

to imitate someone (constantly), to act like a certain person, to resemble. owepou.

my scalp hurts from the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

to come to feel a painful sensation due to an irritation or superficial wound. hushiai.

I'm going to touch your nose with the glans. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

to touch with the glans in a precise place. tiprushikei.

I am hungry. shinari* uko.

to be hungry. shinari*.

the meat of the babilla always gets stuck between my teeth. ya naki hami iwa yãhi hãkikou.

to grab by the shoulders, to hold by the shoulders. hãkihi.

what is happening to him this time. weti naha pei a wãri kuaai shiroãi.

this time. shiroãi.

to hang (upriver dialect). fehã.

the tapir was infested with ticks. shama a toripioma.

to be infested with ticks. toripioma.

to make dirty, to make covered in mud or ashes. toteshiamai.

dark, obscure. weyata.

to tap with the tip of an object, to knock on a door once. krookai.

acts. tikararei.

he put his head between his shoulders for a moment. he pasutou.

to put one. pasutou.

in the branches. wahehou.

to submerge his/her head forcefully in water. the ki hamisha.

to submerge someone. hamisha-.

I descended the mountain in the place where there were dead, rotting cows. ware pe ni ithãri re hiraowei hami ya mi re weteparekiriowei.

to descend dispersed. weteparekiriowei.

to scratch oneself once. iprushiprou.

she simply appeared near her mother. pe nii mi thari hami ha e petou perayoma (mit.

she simply appeared. perayoma.

the people of Hukowe invited us. h ukowe theri peni pemareki nakai kuprehei.

Hukowe (a place name). ukowe.

to take objects out of a canoe or water one after the other. washiripraai.

thanks to the soap, it will certainly become clean. the ki auprouwei ke the, fapomi ke ani.

to become clean or white. auprouwei.

do not gather (do not group together). pe tishoshatihe.

a great quantity of termites swarmed in the water. mãuuhami komi konaki tishoshama.

to gather and form a compact group. tishoshai.

as the yawari woman clouded my reason, I will do something else. yãwãriyomani ware shi ha wãrimarini ya puhi aithaa ta totihipe.

to change one. aitha.

downstream, to be placed downstream. koroa.

to become a mãrãnãpi (a youth between 10 and 13 years old). mãrãnãpiãi.

yo y mi cuñado vamos a recoger frutos. mayepi yagra.

to gather fruits. yagra.

The disease demons devour my flesh (= they make me thin). shawara ke kini yare tire-sheai kure.

1. To remove meat from a bone by scraping with the nails. 2. To become very thin.. tireshek.

to worry about someone. puhi mi yapaai.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco.). shoataa.

get into the river immediately. pe ta ithoa shoaparu.

to descend, to get down. ithokei.

to have diarrhea repeatedly. kriimou.

there is a lot of honey. puu pe no nihi.

to produce a lot of food. no nihi.

to start cutting in a circular manner, removing the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimoneneprai.

extend your hand (for me to give you something). imiki ta totoiku.

to extend the arm to grab something; to offer, present (to give). totoai.

to conserve piled up, to conserve stacked. heruyutupou.

let it approach (an animal). ya wã tisuamai ma kui pe the taproimi tharei: de a h e t e a m a i.

I bring it closer. ya the ahetamai.

to approach, to get close. ahetamai.

the woman did not stop sinking her belly and hiding her head in the hammock fabric. suwe ke a mi hore wãheãpraroma, yii ke ki ha a he yohoapraroma.

to hide the head in the hammock fabric. yohoapraroma.

to whistle to call someone, whistling while modulating the name, nickname or kinship term of the person being called. husi komi.

to empty. prokotou.

bring the meat here, transporting it on your back. yaro a ta yehipoima.

bring, fetch. poima.

they (two) found a cooked and twisted caterpillar on the ground and picked it up. kasha ke a ripi prithothowe hokepireiwei.

to deform, to become hard like leather, to twist. prithotho.

to sit in the water with legs spread apart. reheheai.

it is still dirty. the shami shoawe.

dirty, stained, impure. shami.

nail. krao.

to have spread, to have extended (surface), to have expanded. reraharayou.

¡Attention, their voices sink under the ground. mihami ke, pe ã he ohoai ta tikooheri.

to disappear suddenly in the middle of something, to be swallowed up; to remain for a moment under water, to sink for a moment to the bottom of a large hammock. ohoprou.

to be in good health again. temiã.

he opened the hammock he was carrying, and lay down for a while. abierto el chinchorro que traía, y se tendió un buen rato.

open. abierto.

to be about to have round spots painted on oneself or something in that manner. hikikipram.

a red and polished stone axe was leaning (against a tree trunk), downstream. poo ke the koshi pata wake si tãihiwe ithãã hã reikukirini.

was leaning (against a tree trunk), downstream. reikukirini.

other times the váquiros came in search of them. ware ke kini a nape prakea ha koruheni (mit.

came in search of. koruheni.

to be angry. shoporopi.

1. To become frayed. 2. To lose its covering (fruit); to lose its skin.. warokoshiai.

they (the two) renounced their project right away. ke kipi kuyea ha paririni.

to renounce, to give up. paririni.

to bend or twist the edge of a tool. tishikikei.

to begin to have desire. ohoro.

he arrived at a place where there were blue-headed parrots (scattered in the trees). ãrima pe re kupramou piyekouwei hami a warokema.

I'm going to have myself painted with wavy lines on my body. ya oni eyekepramou.

indicates a plurality of subjects (or possible subjects). pramo.

to be constipated. shi hoki.

(he/she) clicks the tongue. aka tahamou.

to click the tongue. tahamo.

to move towards the center of the fire to stoke it (perfective, plural object). tikukurarei.

la nutria se desplazaba (hacia ellos), estirando el cuello en algunos sitios (por encima del agua). wãi katiatarou ha kooimani.

to move stretching the neck. katiatarou.

the mashohara plant comes towards you, moving along the ground. mashohara henaki wayu re urerope ye.

cultivated plant; Blechum sp. (Acantaceae). It is attributed hallucinogenic properties, inhaled mixed with yakoana.. urerope.

Children and adolescents of both sexes cannot eat its meat. Los niños y los adolescentes de ambos sexos no pueden comer su carne.

agouti paca (a type of rodent). lapa.

to be wrinkled or crumpled in one place. ãpreteray.

the hekura went to kill the dog (or: the shamans traveled in immaterial form to go kill the dog). hekura peni hiima ke a nohi washuai ha kuparuheni.

to take a woman without authorization, to seize another man. washu.

to pleat (perfective aspect of the incompletive). wãhikei.

me he curado por completo gracias al hielo. peni ya haroa totihirayou kure.

to cure. haroa.

to have gotten a cough/cold. thokopirayou.

a short time passed. yãhuyãhumai.

to pass a short time. yãhu.

he fell and cried out in pain. a ha kerini, a rããmorayoma.

fell. kerini.

coporo fish. ãrimashirimi.

if you insist on going you will get yourself killed (at the edge of the water). wa hua he ha yatirini wa shemoparu.

derivational verbal allomorph of -mopariyo- in the presence of derived forms, modals or other forms characterized by the same phonological conditioning. -moparu-.

to be afraid. akanasimi.

several dents. wãhihirayou.

to crack something in several places. nashoprai.

stumbled, tripped due to weakness. yoteteray.

"they sleep near here", then they said. "the pe miã re ahetarayoi e.

they sleep near here (= they will arrive soon). ahetarayoi.

vacillated, hesitated (perfective). wekekerayou.

to detach, to separate from a main body. hoyoprou.

our distant ancestors disliked the chatter of honey bees. no patapi peni puu u pe ã nohi wãripoma.

ancestors, first humans. no patapi.

they wear old worn-out loincloths. wayuko yãpishipi pe rapouhe.

to wear out, deteriorate (cloth). yãpushipi.

extender, estirar un dedo. fi mihena kashesheai.

doblar un dedo. fi mihena shãkoãi.

finger. mamihena.

they buried sticks at the exit of the burrow (to block the hole). hiki ithãkemahe, pei ke pekapi kasi hami.

they buried. ithãkemahe.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to give an order repeatedly. nosiyemotaai.

they turned around and began to move away when the little frog transformed into a jaguar. the pe humapi rea payekeprou tehe wawa hena ira kuprou shoarayoma.

to begin to move away. payekeprou.

light red (or faded) (upriver speech). we (habla de río arriba.

light red (or faded). we.

to blaze very brightly. haruharumou.

he went to a region that was not his and the consequences were disastrous, that brought him misery. shomi ke the urihi hami a no wãri ha preroherini pe the no wãri shi hiroprarou ha kurai.

to bring misfortune, to cause misery. preroherini.

the Espíritu-guacamaya tends the ear to listen. arariwe e he re aharape.

to listen. aharape.

gelatinous; sticky. kreukreupi.

(mit. yeture e the mi pata titi yopramai ha shoaroherini.

the deployment/spread of night. shoaroherini.

The wild squirrel was perhaps about to run back. wayapashiriwe ke a no rerea mi yaparayopi.

it is likely to happen, it is about to happen. yaparayopi.

to be slightly open towards the exterior. uhehewe.

is not that one who lives at the foot of Mount Mãroha the one who killed my relative. kihi mãroha siki pepi ha, ei a re peripe, ihi a ma kuini, ipa wa naki tea perei ma ta kuhawe.

mountain. Mãroha.

I'm going to hit you in the side. pe sherenaki shekei.

to hit someone in the side (lit: to hit someone in the lung). sherenaki shekei.

the demons of the night passed. weyari pe re hayuyonowei.

we (two) want them to pass us, that's why we stop. yahe pe niya re hayuamakiriowei, yaheki uprapekirio.

to pass in front of someone. hayu.

the messenger of the party appeared suddenly in the dwelling saying: tu, tu, tu. tu, tu, tu.

to appear suddenly in a dwelling or path. haprariyoma.

to break the tip. huhetikei.

to have traced several transverse lines. yãprutarei.

"do not look at us", above all do not say that when the Rain Spirit shakes the ends of the roof poles. maariweni naﬁki ora yayoai tehe: "wamare mitihe", a kuu tikootihe.

spirit associated with rain. maariwe.

to start perforating, piercing, or opening something. horoshoprai.

headdress of the hekura that resembles a burning ember. watoshe puritoa.

Psidium (Myrtaceae) tree (lit. matoto-pore hi.

Psidium (Myrtaceae) tree. matoto-pore.

the horseflies have a flattened sucking mouthpart. ware ãshi pe husho he tatahawe.

to flatten the end of an elongated object (stick, piece of wood). tatahou.

curve. atho.

to choose first. makokoprai.

they had the intention of exchanging their wives. pe pe mi niya hemihãpii ha kuperei.

to turn over multiple objects, to exchange multiple objects, to exchange wives. hemihiãkei.

(speaks of upriver). shoferemapi.

it moved along the curved part of the tree. hi re hithoreawei hami a kuaaherima.

to be bent, curved, inclined. hithorea.

to have dug a shallow hole (factual of the durative). maketimamai.

when they arrived they scattered the packages of guabinas on the ground. kuma ke pe the ma hãro pata re yapikohoroperei.

since it was night they disordered the objects, and then scattered the calabashes. the mi ha titioni matohi pe yapikai shoaomahe, koa ke hesi pe yapikai piyekou re shoaomahe.

to scatter, to spread out, to disarray objects on the ground. yapikai.

who are you, that you have a breath that smells like a woman's sex. weti wa mishiãki ni moshiri reprou ayarayou ta kuhawe (cha. (= who are you, who, pretending to be a shaman, nevertheless make love to women) (the shaman detected that smell while in a trance). ).

to have the smell of a woman who has just had sex. kuhawe.

they seemed like termite nests scattered on the ground. hawe rishima koko pata yapikamai yaioma.

to be scattered, strewn, spread out on the ground. yapikamai.

term applied to the beaks of Celeus elegans, Celeus grammicus and Celeus torquatus (bird species). shuririami.

to have a sunken belly, to be hungry. wãhetewe.

to bathe. kãtou.

the one that is beautiful (referring to the king vulture). areriyehei.

he is always making love. a shi hiroimi.

to not fear committing repugnant or reprehensible acts; to spend time making love; to have committed one or more incests; to be aggressive. hironomi.

to have nothing else to accompany what one eats. tehimiprou.

to have nothing else to accompany what one eats. tehimiprou.

magical substance. koreshe.

to roll up in a spiral, to curl up. yapurai.

to stick out the tongue. aka wae.

how beautiful are the leaves of the singing tree that is found downstream. ãmoã henaki re riyeherakiri ye.

that is found downstream. riyeherakiri.

¿por qué motivo se disputan. weti wama the ãhã thai kupiyei.

to dispute. kupiyei.

to put something in the middle, in the center. thari.

Onom., noise of arrows clashing together. tai!.

null. hurepaya.

to hang (racimos of plantains or cambures) inverted with respect to their usual position. madushokãtama.

to return to the shapono (communal house) one after another. ãmopraai.

to move further away. prahaprou.

when we had left the morichal behind, we ambushed again. eteweshi yama siki he ha parokuni, yamaki yetekea korãriyo.

to be ambushed, to lie in ambush. yetekea.

I don't have a quid of tobacco under my upper lip, that's why I lament. nosinosi ke ya wai hiipoimi yaro ya peshiri miã ikii.

to place a quid of tobacco under the upper lip. hiipoimi.

it seems that the combat staff has been smeared with heri. hii nami he ha horooni.

to be smeared/coated with heri (a plant resin). horooni.

the people upriver use such narrow loinclothes that their testicles protrude on both sides. ora theri peni wayuko makosi pe ha rapoheni pe natheki yakaroprawe.

to be located on both sides of. karoprawe.

to be about to go and have oneself painted. hahetipramou.

(they) repeated 'let's go'. pe miotihe.

to repeat an act, to do the same thing several times in a row. -taa.

he abandoned his mats of plantain, and after his departure these became rocks. kuratha siki thaa fa shoakeferini, ketipa re e siki kuprou feoma.

after his/her/its departure. feoma.

to weave the rods of a basket to make its edge. llar.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they reached the summit of the Gallineta mountain. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe.

to reach the summit, to move along a summit, to curl up into a ball. pororoai.

at the place where the tree is divided into two branches. hi sherereope ha.

the place where the tree is divided into two branches. sherereope.

I will slip between the felled large trees and kill you all. kayapa hiki mohe re yoare hami ya hirerea he ha yatiikuni ya pe wãri waikape.

large tree. kayapa.

I am worried, there are not enough cooked plantains and there are only two small bunches left in the field. ya puhi ma re horihitou totihirohe, roshi the no wãi kuprou totihiopi mai, porakapi the kipi wai onohowe yaua kupiyekiri.

to worry, to be anxious. horihitou.

to be full to the brim. manikiwe.

to be located in an irregular manner. parereai.

por aquí, en esta dirección, desemboca el camino. eyemi themithemi e yo he ãhã hapraa.

Direction. themithemi.

species of arrow that the hekura possess. hatakoãmi.

it seems they crossed (the river) at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami e pe ãhã pekatuatayoma.

the others have already crossed. yetu ai the pe pekatua waikiokei.

upriver and on the other side of the river is where the old fields are located. hei pekaturahari ha, hei re e theka wãri pata no (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to cross a body of water, to cross a river. fpekatu.

tooth that has been removed in that manner. yayetima.

to have leveled, to have flattened. resisirayou.

to heal, to cure. temioprou.

to show teeth, to bare teeth, to smile or laugh showing teeth. weehetou.

to be crushed. nahihiãi.

they are getting on (a canoe). tikepramou.

to lose one. moyepitou.

always. hisiempre.

Cook the cassava roots and give them to him to eat. nashiki wama e kokoku ha tupani, a ta iyamahe.

to feed, to give food to someone. iyamahe.

to become oily, to acquire the appearance and consistency of oil or fat. shiihãi.

when the girl who had her first period came out, the ground softened. yipi ke the waweprou re ayarayouwei, pitha a epehewe kuprariyoma.

when the girl who had her first period came out (of the shelter where she was confined). ayarayouwei.

in what refers to water, we will not lack it. pemaki rii yapekeope, mãu ke upe ha.

to have fallen ill (and due to this to have disrupted the course of one. yapekerayou.

it is without a doubt because of those constant itches that she always laughs. ke the pe shiki preaturou wa the ikãprarou nosiye.

to laugh. ikãprarou.

to go on a visit, to depart to visit another community. fhama huu.

Rabipelado arrived at the community he was visiting. nãroriwe a hama ha aruherini, yahi hami a koproma.

to visit. fhama.

a long rope for tying or binding a load to be carried on the back. prithothomarariara.

their corpses were strewn on the ground. pe nomawe mi tikukuoma.

they found the black-painted sorcerers strewn (dead) on the ground. okã pe pata ishi mi tikukuwe tararemahe (mit.

to scatter, spread, strew on the ground. tikukamai.

still a little new or recent. ftutohohowe.

(he) kills someone. mratamai : matar a alguien.

to kill someone. mratamarei.

the pijiguaos have many bunches. rasha pe ikrehea.

to tie something tightly winding a vine around it. ikrehai.

those (the shamans) who are capable of spitting the magical substances, from their mouth comes a foam similar to shapo. the pe pehi hoã re thaowei, hawe shapo ke u pe pata kuwe.

synonym. shapo.

I hurry to go get my bark hammock. yãriye ya natha siki nape kãi wãri re yekeiwei.

hammock made of yãri natha bark. yãriye.

he put the dead children at the bottom (of the carrying basket), and sat the living one on top. ihi-koikoimi ru nomawe ke the pe ha kohomakini heaka ha temi Zool.

to put down, to put at the bottom. kohomoãkei.

to have a swollen foot. shekekeai.

to undress (neologism). ukeprou.

to undress, to take off (clothes). uke.

to touch once. tiprushi.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantities. yatehai.

to collect tobacco for oneself by cutting with the nails (perfective). tirirei.

go and stand/put yourself over there. kihami ke a wãri ta kuroheri.

to go and stand/put oneself somewhere. kuroheri.

catch a knife fish (and cook it) on one of these leaves that you will lick. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

to catch a fish by pulling the fishing line. shaiai.

to shiver; to tremble with fever; to have convulsions. rahirahimo.

The bushes hold the roof leaves in place. Hiyehiyema shiki masiko pe.

branches or bushes placed on a roof to hold the leaves in place. hiyehiyema.

to fabricate a slightly longer arrow than usual. tirehekei.

to limp, to hobble. kayehou.

ho ko re w e: 1. ho ko re w e: 1. To have a knot (wood). Tener un nudo (madera). 2. 2. To be knotted in various parts (binding). Estaré anudado en varias partes (atadura).

in various parts. perire.

what can be crushed, cleaned or extracted by striking it with an object. patikamou.

he palpated it several times and then said: "it's an old man". a ha huperarini: "pata ke the", e kuma.

to touch different places, to palpate. huperarini.

while this is really soft. pe te hi pe epehewe.

to soften, to become soft. epehe.

to strike with a machete, to cut with a machete. krashikrashimou.

while they were approaching the sandy beach, the demon of the quicksand attracted them (to the bottom of the water). mrakamraka ke pe ha pe ikuo tehe heãhãturiweni ke the re ikokoreiwei.

to attract (to the bottom of the water). ikokoreiwei.

lamentablemente los hekura volvieron minúscula la boca del jaguar. yãnomãmi the hekurapini ira kahiki wãsipipramai tikorayoma.

small amount of something. wiisipi.

to stay for a long time in the center. tharitao.

to be hungry. shoetãi.

they approached immediately and set fire to the palm leaves. ke kipi ukua re shoakeiwei, masiko ke ki wake piyemapikema.

they set fire to the palm leaves. piyemapikema.

to recover consciousness after having been under the influence of a very strong hallucinogen; to free oneself after having been possessed by a supernatural being; to become human. yãnomãmiprou.

they climbed (the mountain) and, as they were going up, Kasima felt dizzy. misi iyeiyerimi shi kirihotayoma (mit.

felt dizzy. kasima.

the crested curassow's crest is bristled. paruri a hesikaki mãririwe.

to be bristled (feathers or fur of an animal). mãririwe.

to become dusty, to get covered in dust. hekãhekãpiãi.

Sorocuá advanced staggering, and then collapsed. kurekurethawe re e krei re kuaaheriiwei, a shoaparema.

to collapse, to fall down. shoaparema.

tree. Mouriria.

Trocitos de madera sobre los que se coloca el fuego para encenderlo cuando el suelo está mojado. wãnapo.

to stick along something (especially, an arrow that sticks along someone when falling). wikokoprou.

to roll up, to wrap around something, to tie, to wrap, to make a package by wrapping a tie around. yãthoriãi.

to be impassive, stoic (in relation to pain, danger); not to show sadness during mourning. puhi rohothoo.

to endure, to resist, to withstand. ohotho.

to urinate. fuke.

metaphor for saying that rumors and news spread rapidly. fwãno pe imikou.

to spread rapidly (like rumors or news). fwãno.

to peel or remove the skin/shell of a fruit by shaking or sudden movement. eharayou.

to deceive oneself, to nurture false hopes, to be mistaken about someone. mirãrayou.

I have slippery hands and everything slips out of them all the time (= my hands are so slippery that I can't hold onto it). ya imiki takre ha the yohotai.

he lowered the turtle (making it slide along its support) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to drip, slide over something (an elongated object); to slip over something and fall; to let oneself slide along a trunk; to slip out of the hand; to go down a steep slope. yohou.

Deceased woman (ceremonial discourse or serious speech about death). cokohomo.

to be too tight and tense, with the body straight as a consequence. kasheshekei.

ay, the woman was so afraid that she kept running from one side to the other. suwe ke a kiriri ruaprarou ha tikoikuni.

to run from one side to the other. aro.

They got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

To get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people). weyoyoprou.

to paint, adorn with designs. yãhiri.

to receive a medium or rather large object. prowehepei.

I glanced. ya mipraai.

to do something for a very short time. mipraahe.

movement of the tail of several fish that swim. yarayaramou.

Jaguar went very far away describing circles (mythological). yahi hami a katitihu ke pe hami a yaheriatarou ha kuparuni.

to go very far away, to move away (mythological). yaheriatarou.

encima de la roca yacía una tragavenado. pei ke maki heaka hami hokoto keki re waririonowei.

tragavenado (type of snake). waririonowei.

desamarra la curiara (canoa). kanawa a ta k u s h e p r a r i.

él desamarró el chinchorro (que cargaba sobre la espalda), y se acostó. yii theki a ha kusherini a perioma.

to untie, to detach, to take for oneself an object that is untied. sherini.

to make muddy. ãhiãmai.

The toucan flew in turn towards the broken liana that was still swinging, and grabbed onto it. Tucán voló a su vez ga un objeto) [yatukai, dur.

to stretch downwards. yatukai.

squirrel cuckoo (bird species). shikoyãmi.

they also killed crax birds for their wing feathers (lit. paruri imisi pe kãi niyama.

feathers of the crax bird used for arrow fletching. ashiashirimi.

(myth): it curled up to jump, it was going to die, it was going to be killed. ira ke a pusututou tehe, a mori niyão tehe, ikãri a shei shoama.

to become hard like leather, to shrivel up, to curl up on oneself. pusutuai.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk through water, to wade. iroroo.

before there was no water, there were no rivers. hapa mãu u pe kuonomi, hei parau pe re kui u pe kuonomi.

water. kuonomi.

those bamboos inclined, I will cut them to make bamboo tips, with which I will inflict wounds. hei sikoropirimi ki re raipe ya rii ha hãithoreni, ya iye pe ka ha tharini.

to inflict wounds. hãithoreni.

one cannot detect the enemies in ambush when walking at the head. pari hami yãnomãmi pe the pe tapraimi ke pe no tharaheshi.

to detect enemies in ambush. tharaheshi.

he called the others who butchered the animal. ai pe ha pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni.

calling/summoning others. pokomireni.

he sat alone, near there, on a small fallen tree. hii hiki ihirupi ha a yãmi roa payekekema.

ihirupiprai: to make small, to fabricate small, to reduce the size of something that is too big. ihirupiprai : volver pequeño, fabricar pequeño, achicar algo que es demasiado grande.

small, short. ihirupi.

in the center (of the fabric), there where it is dense, the Spider-spirit was crouched. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma (cha.

to become dense, thick, dense (in the center of something). sutapariyo.

latex of the rubber tree; rubber, elastic (neologism). husuhusu.

to install oneself several times in a row in the lower part of temporary shelters when moving through the forest. shikãtou.

relation of father-in-law or mother-in-law to son-in-law. thatheye.

to break by falling, to crack as a result of a shock (a round object). yahathoprou.

he put water and smoothed his hair with it. wãri hokokooma.

he tied the capuchin monkey's tail around his head, and smoothed it with his hand. ha yohoreni, the teshina hokokama.

to smooth, to caress, to massage, to rub (during a shamanic cure). hokokama.

he went to meet Siroromi, grabbed him and threw him into the fire. siroromi re a yãkão mi ha paoni koa wake ha a sheyepema.

fire, flame; firebrand. roromo.

repetitive movement of someone climbing a tree, gathering the body and taking momentum from the lumbar region to rise up. pusutupusutumou.

it returned quickly to place an ant nest (of the konakona species) on the ground. konakona pe pesi praa shoakeyoruma.

to place on the ground, to put down. praakei.

to sting (a mosquito or insect). hiii.

to leave wet repeatedly. heretaamai.

having many clusters on the lower part. ikrekea.

are they going to prepare that strap for (carrying) the pot. kihi hapoka wama e natha re thaare.

to prepare a strap/cord. thaare.

to become a little deep (of water level). ayaraprou.

with circular movements (such as peeling an apple with a knife). shokekerarei.

(to speak of upriver). sufra.

to have been dug not very deeply. maketia.

to place two long objects next to each other. waririai.

como los que caminaban a la cabeza cambiaron otra vez de dirección, ãkroto nos deslizamos hacia ellos agachados. the pe wãri ora akeheprou koã ha kama pe riha yamaki terekou shoaoma.

to change direction. akeheai.

when the adults were absent, Jaguar killed the children (to eat them). pe hii re the pe no kupramou tehe, irani ihiru re pe shei heama.

to be temporarily absent from the dwelling, to go outside to do work. kupramou.

1. to become dusty, to cover with dust 2. dusty 3. dust. hekrã.

to occur suddenly very close (noise, voice). tisutou.

to burn carelessly. hisikio.

to be a little thin, a little worn out from use or corroded by moisture. frepisihi.

I'm coming soon. ya huu ahetewe.

it's almost cooked. the ripi ahetewe.

the night is approaching. the mi titi ahetewe.

to approach, to come near, to invite someone to live nearby. ahe-.

small bird; Pachyramphus sp. (Tyrannidae). koãpatarami.

both (of them) made Rahararitawe run back and forth crying from thirst. rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama.

to run from one side to another, to go back and forth. rara.

small vegetable residues mixed in water. koshãkoshã.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

to dominate by size, to be bigger than. morokoã.

(no clear translation). ithã.

that unrolls as it falls, like a big turd. hawe shii the pata yorirou: eso se enrolla al caer, como un gran mojón.

it unrolls/unwinds slowly. yoririrayou.

to shoot with a shotgun (neologism). tãiprai.

baskets full of momo fruits. n cestas llenas de frutos momo.

baskets. cestas.

it trembles momentarily. u rayukai.

to tremble momentarily. rayukai.

come here to cook the meat. yaro a ta tumayo.

come here to eat meat. yaro a ta wayo.

go and meet your husband (where he is). heãroye ke iha a ta aruheriyo.

in the place in question; when the place is not mentioned, it refers to the place of the utterance, or if not, a previously mentioned place, or the place where the person in question is located. tumayo.

he ate it all and returned home in a state of being a killer and being satiated. a waa ha haikirini a unokai ha kopoherini, petiri (mit.

in a state of being a killer and being satiated. kopoherini.

to be a little heavy. fhutehe.

goods for exchange (during a wayamou). thomipi.

don't touch, don't steal (lit. fmi [+ neg. : don't look). ]: no tocar, no robar (lit.

you deserve it (lit. fei the ta mi.

to look, to observe. fmii.

the canoe is corroded in parts by rot. kanawa a repisi.

to be thinner due to rust, decomposition or use; to become thinner, corroded by rust and rotten parts; to be worn out. repisi.

I was afraid and startled. yacia de una formas derivadas, modales u otras, caracterizadas por un mismo condicionamiento fonológico.

to be afraid, to be startled. yasuai.

swelling of the belly. hihuti.

dictionary. pehitho.

de nuevo me invitaron. yare nakapou koohe.

to invite, to solicit. horomo.

to let the cooking water of a food evaporate by neglect. wehemapei.

to have left to cool down. pothothorayou.

to live next to someone. tikepariyo.

he gets angry only with his wife. pe suwepi ke iha a kahiki shiro kushetou.

to open the jaws (of an animal), to part the lips (to speak); to threaten the weak and remain silent before others. ushetou.

I turned my torso to the side and, bending down, tensed my bow. hãto re ya nahi ikokai tutakaoma.

to avoid a projectile. tutakaroyou.

we entered the Maatha river and walked upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

to walk in the water (plural subject). iroiromou.

to take a semi-pasty consistency. mi thepeheai.

to take a semi-pasty consistency. mi thepehe.

it has perched on the old dry and hard wood log. ãmãrokoma a ha the makea.

to dry and harden without rotting (a dead log). ãmãroko.

I am carving a bamboo tip. rahaka ya kopemai.

we will prepare bamboo tips like these (to go to war). e naha rafaka ke pe kuwe pema pe ha kopemani.

to prepare, smooth, carve, divide into pieces. kopemai.

to have been killed (enemy). no wãyuprou.

to have been killed (enemy). wãyuprou.

to become speckled or spotted (with black). pãrishãpiprou.

shukukuwe. mamoku*.

butterflies (generic term for diurnal butterflies). uwãuwãmi.

aggressive way of shouting of the kori bird. wayumou.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock one after the other. yakapraai.

fish, guabina; Erythrinus erythrinus (Erythrinidae). ishawe.

we will come to visit. pemaki hamamope.

we will come to visit. hamamope.

to paint dots on someone. tipikai.

to extinguish any fire (except those located in the central plaza). ãkikimakei.

to start clenching teeth. wãsinitou.

he pulled down the liana gently several times. pe thotho ikoikomoma.

to pull down, to attract downwards. ikomos.

to cause an erection. yorumai.

to have pivoted, to have spun around an axis, to have revolved. shimoremorayou.

to be weeding the communal house. shaponomou.

to be weeding the communal house. shaponomou.

he tied the gallinetas (birds) one next to the other and carried them on his back. hãshimo ke kipi parekerema.

he carried two plucked paujíes (birds) one against the other, he gave them to the woman. paruri e kipi roshi ha parekereni, suwe ke iha e kipi hipekema (mit.

to tie two objects of the same type together and carry them on one. parekereni.

mother, do not worry after my departure, tomorrow I go out to cast magic substances (against someone). henaha re ya horeprarorayoherii.

after my departure, tomorrow I go out to cast magic substances (against someone). horeprarorayoherii.

pasar una mala noche, dormir mal o no dormir en la noche. shi hihirimou.

to have a bad night, to sleep poorly or not sleep at night. hihiri.

pei. konatho.

certain parts of the roots protrude from the soil surface. hii nasiki pe urea.

to protrude partially, to emerge partially. urea.

your child will be brave (lit. nini manaheheproimi, nini wãnonoproimi fwa ihirupi niniope.

child. nini.

to sneeze. esikamou.

this does not reach boiling. the yorupraroimi.

it does not reach boiling. yorupraroimi.

to prepare for war, to prepare for an attack (lit. frahaka hiiãprarai.

to prepare for war, to prepare for an attack. hiiãprarai.

they left me on the banks of the river. yare kãi re kupariyowehei.

they left me. kupariyowehei.

the house was emptying of inhabitants when I arrived. the yãno rorokãi tehe ya warokema.

to empty of inhabitants (dwelling, camp). rorokãi.

your hands stink. wa imiki ni feweri.

to stink. feweri.

go several (of you). pe ta pakihipraruheri.

to go several people to perform a task. pakaku.

the cassava plants fell uprooted. nashi siki si poruprariyoma.

fallen, uprooted. poruprawe.

to become slightly red. shopohoprou.

the hekura shot arrows against the daughter of the y a w a r i. taritari ke peni yãwãriyoma pe teepi a niyamahe.

they shot arrows. teepi.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered in bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to have a bruise. petiripi.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

to throw over, throw higher than. moroko.

sharp (a bamboo point). hirorore.

sorocuá de cola blanca (white-tailed trogon bird). tetepe.

Hormiguero stopped being sleepy and woke up. teperiwe ke a wãri maharishi mrai ha kuparuni, a hokeprariyoma.

to be woken up, to be disturbed during sleep (not having slept enough). fmaharishi waiyou.

to have a strong desire to sleep. fmaharishi preprou.

to stop having sleepiness, to wake up. fmaharishi.

it is said when several paths lead into the same place. fyo he pe haprawe.

to protrude (end of an object). he haprawe.

at the moment when (the beast) was going to crush the turtle with its teeth, the hekura stopped it (saying ushu. totori a mori watikiprai tehe, hekura peni "--ushu. ushu. ushu. to prevent that misfortune). ".

interjection used to stop someone from doing something undesirable. ushu!.

to make objects fall one after another. prereamai.

even the axes of the macaw people had their ends damaged. arari ke pe hãyokomãpi ma kui pe he re thekeheokei no kureshi.

to be locally damaged at the end due to a fall or impact (long object). thekeheãi.

to suffer from strabismus. aharawe.

to become slippery (interior of an object). takra.

to do/execute a task together. Pakihi.

I will transport a heavy load of game animals. yaro re ya ki hute preaprarai totihikei.

to transport a heavy load. preaprarai.

Refers to the females of various bird species of the genus Pipra sp. The Yanomami are unaware of the marked sexual dimorphism of these birds, and call the females, which are all olive-green in color and very similar across different species, . waketherimi.

object that can be. watikamou.

durative, plural acts. shishai.

ketipa si: bot. ketipa si : bot. , plantain; P h e n a k o s p e r m u m guyanense (Strelitziaceae). , platanillo; P h e n a k o s p e r m u m guyanense (Strelitziaceae). It resembles the banana plant a little, in size and bearing. Se parece un poco al bananero, por el porte y por el tamaño.

plantain. ketipa si.

to be partially torn or shredded. rehihia.

it is still a young tree and also it can be The word 'ke' in Yanomami means 'a, an'. huya ke hi.

the branch broke, he fell and cried in pain. hi poko keprou tehe a ha kerini a rããmorayoma.

the tree sways (repeatedly). pe hi ketaketamou.

placenta. ke.

to protect oneself or be protected by a barrier of branches or palm leaves. pesio.

to be constantly streaked by lightning (sky). ihãihãmou.

(he/she/it) is the object of someone's friendship or love. puhi yauai.

to be the object of someone. puhi yau.

not long ago they came to widen the entrance of the burrow of the babilla (to reach it and kill it). iwa a wãri re tishiiwei, e the tishi no tute.

to widen the opening of a burrow by making the earth fall with a machete, a bow or a pointed stick. tishiiwei.

perfective plural object of . hoterariyo.

the young people made several trips downriver to transport the plantains and also it can be The word 'kuratha' in Yanomami means 'banana'. huya peni pe kuratha yehiaprakiriomahe.

there are banana leaves on the ground. kuratha si hena praa kure.

downriver. kuratha.

I arrived when he was gravely ill. a hariri prao totihio tehe ya warokema.

despite being ill, he defended himself bravely. hariri a ma kui a waitherimoma.

to become ill, to get sick. hihatho.

"people from upriver came to attack us with deadly substances", they declared. ora theri ke pe okã huma.

to go and throw deadly substances at enemies. fokã.

in the place inhabited by the soul of Yãmonãmãriwe, the bees immediately took flight (= the bees fled immediately and took refuge in the land of souls). yãmonãmãriwe re a no porepi re perirati hami, puu nari re pe hetua katitia re shorayouwei.

mythological ancestor. yãmonãmãriwe.

he just penetrated into the dense vegetation. rutheruthe a ha a si poikuhe the huu tao re mai.

to penetrate into dense vegetation. poikuhe.

go out (upriver speech). a ta fari (habla de río arriba.

go out. fari.

the great Teremi carried in his arms a small cachicamo with wrinkled skin, thirsty (for milk). teremi ke a patani, opo si ãikiwe ke a wai amishiri ha yakareni.

to carry a small child or animal in one. yakareni.

to have mixed (two powders). tikururayou.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually. iyarariyowei.

to make smaller, to reduce, to diminish, to make melt. kuwetamarei.

speech of upriver. ﬁshomi.

it was him who let a tree fall on the path. kamani yo shemakema.

to fall on. shekei.

to become hollow, to crack in a place. wareshe.

the pot hangs tilted. toutami si yauo akarewe.

to hang or suspend in an inclined or unbalanced position. akareprou.

to receive something that has been torn or cut lengthwise. sheriripei.

here is where it appeared for the first time. eyeha ke a wãri hapa waweprareyoruu kurei.

they arrived and gathered. e pe re shimoopareyorunowei.

directional suffix. -yoru.

¿a quién. weti ke iha.

to whom?. iha?.

(he) arches himself at the same time as a shaman and spots a game animal. patutoho do como chamán y divisa a un animal de caza.

to arch oneself at the same time. patutoho.

the house of the enemies was empty and we did not kill anyone. w a r e re ke ki yanopi prokotaai ha totiikuni.

empty. prokotaai.

brother-in-law, when they move they seem to be as robust as you. shori, ei kahe ke wa wãri mimou re kure naha the pe kãi rohothoaprarouhe.

to be firm, strong; old, elderly. rohothoa.

supernatural beings of the yai the class, can cause diseases and take possession of a person. hekrãtahu.

to place the arms. wikoko.

extinguish the flames and also it can be The word 'rãiki' in Yanomami means 'to carry'. koa wake rãiki.

I carry the child. Ẽ rãiki a pihio.

extinguish. rãiki.

fruit of the seje palm. haprua.

to make necklaces. ha- katiki.

to renounce them. ha ta tiratai.

to do, to make. ha-.

while carrying the rock, he was listening and staying on the lookout. maa ma yehiporani, yimika taataroma.

we went down the slope rolling with arrows in our hands. shereka yama pe porani yamaki nihoropraakirioma.

he lay in a cotton hammock and looked around. yii ke ki ha a perirani the pe mii piyekou.

indicates that two actions or events occur together; can often be translated as . miyomiyorãni.

stream, brook, minor watercourse without depth. etehe.

complex verb form composed of the iterative -taa-, the causative or permissive -ma-, and the perfective -re, followed by a tense marker. -taamari.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. yao ãki.

speech of the south of the Orinoco. yao.

a man set up his shelter on the path of Siroromiwe. siroromiwe ke a no mãyo hami poreri ke a peria ha reparuni (mit.

Path, trail or mark left by a particular being (real or supernatural). siroromiwe.

he fell into the water and drowned. a ha keparuni a mishi tupariyoma.

drowned. ahogó.

he is the one who wants to kill you and with that intention he got a bamboo tip. ihini re wa riyã matamai ha totihioni wa pehi tea totihirei kurei.

to kill someone. matamai.

sun. taña.

despite everything they went to sit in the water with their legs spread. wãri haa he yatireherayou.

they went to sit in the water with their legs spread. yatireherayou.

you gave (to each one) two objects from the Whites. peyoma wahe e ki mi yãhutãi ha totihioni, ihiru momo oshe pe ma kui riha.

to obtain, to get. yãhutar.

to receive an object divided in that manner. hahetipei.

designates various species of birds of the genus Notharchus sp. (Bucconidae). mãuhutu.

swelling of the belly. hihuti.

Perched on the tip of the tree, Woodpecker stretched his neck to look around. hii ke the hi wai ihete hami eshãmiriwe oraki kayahaapraroma.

to be perched in balance and stretch the neck to look around. kayahaapraroma.

to feel headaches after walking a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit: the path has trembled before). pei yo tirikio pario kuhe.

to tremble, vibrate, shake. tiembla.

to make something fall producing a crash: to make an arrow fall. yashishiai.

we followed the watercourse downstream and discovered a large number of paujíes. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. werepekirio.

he lay in his hammock adorned with a transverse line. thoo ke thoku tipruta ha a perikema.

to be lying quietly in one. peritaa.

Siroromi immediately set about skinning the man. siroromini yãnomãmi the si yoprai shoarayoma.

to separate (skin), to peel off, to strip off bark. tiproko.

he/she is a jealous person. puhi haruorewe ke a.

the one who is jealous. haruorewe.

There is a nest of oi bees in a young motua tree over there. kiha ko oi ke pe yetea kupiyeheri, motua oshetiwe ke hi ha.

1. To be good for harvesting (palm heart). 2. To become very sharp.. osheti.

pishipishimi namo: Zool. pishipishimi namo: Zool. , hummingbird, hermit; Phaethornis sp. , colibrí, ermitañito; Phaethornis sp. (Trochilidae). (Trochilidae).

hummingbird. pishipishimi.

he makes the noise stronger. a wã nakeamai.

to make something stronger, amplify a noise; to season with pepper a food, make tobacco spicy (by preparing it well). nakeamai.

chewed tobacco that lost its flavor. nosi tharei.

tobacco. nosi.

they descended again. desprawe.

he told me to do it (= he authorized me). yare nape shimikema.

they would have really liked to tell him to do it. herasimari pe nape shimai shi ha topraoni.

to tell someone to do something, to authorize someone to take an object. shimikema.

Moyenayoma protected her daughter (from the jaguar) by mounting her on the roof. ha moyenayoma pe thee a hamapoma.

Moyenayoma protected her daughter (from the jaguar) by mounting her on the roof. moyenayoma.

The man had just initiated himself as a shaman, he arrived near some termites that were standing there with their heads covered in white down. yãnomãmi thaamamo no tute ke the, osheri pe he horoi kãi uprahaope ha the waroa re ayakeiwei.

1. To initiate as a shaman. 2. To reserve a portion, keep food for someone temporarily absent.. tha.

"his/her animal/pet attacked the fierce beast there". "thãriyeni yaro a waitheri re shurukuapiyei".

his/her animal/pet. thãriyeni.

leaves that stop being rigid. fhenaki teããi.

to become viscous or sticky. yoreriyo2.

to desatize the fire (separate the embers so they burn more slowly). koa wake ta rãikipa.

to desatize. rãikipa.

to age, to deteriorate (an object). hoteamai.

the path of the hekura is visible when they approach, but they themselves are not seen. hekura pe pe mãyo huu wawetoimai ke a tharei, pei pe taprou ma mai (cha.

to become visible, to appear. wawetoai.

speak of upstream. yorofi wa si ha tiyekini.

upstream. yorofi.

(belongs to the epistemic modality). re RVwei.

particle that plays an important role in syntax. RVwei.

then it transformed into a gray heron (myth) (speaking of the south of the Orinoco). pasho re e si kuprou piyerayoma (mit.

transformed. piyerayoma.

when the woman's belly exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

to cut the end of a long object (by sliding a tool back and forth or applying blows from above). puru.

to have cut in a circular manner, to have removed the damaged part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimonenerei.

the fires (of the survivors) only occupied a part of the dwelling, they had just gone through the affliction of mourning. the pe hãtopi nahi ayaprou heaa ha the pe puhi no preo tutoo ha.

1. To join at the last moment a group that is leaving (the speaker is never the subject). 2. To constitute a remnant, a fraction (of what previously constituted a whole).. ayapramai.

to take or obtain a large quantity. thetherei.

to become soft/mushy (unripe fruit). koshiai.

spiny plant; Solanum sp. (Solanaceae). mohomi misiki.

to pile up, to stack. yutumai.

when I fell back after jumping over a pool of water, I stepped on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

pool of water. peshoku.

the hekura watch over the path, and each time I make them desist. hekura re peni yo nohi wãri ha thapoheni, pei ya pe wãri kuyeataramai.

foreseeing the children's hunger I planted so many cambures rokomi that the overly abundant fruits are spoiling. pei ke ya pe ohi nohi ha thaponi, hei ihiru ke pe rokomipi wãrimou re kupe.

to watch over, take care of (a child, sick person, elderly person, etc.); to suspect or think something about someone. thapoheni.

they were going upriver looking for crabs. oko ke pe hupai mi yãmou ha kuparuni.

we will fish going upriver until here. yuri pema pe kãã mi yãmoimap e.

to go upriver, to climb uphill. mi yãmo.

to feather an arrow. shereka he haoapei.

the cotton with which arrow feathering is attached. shinari shereka pe he re haomamouwei.

to feather an arrow. haoapei.

he undid the knots that held the vines of his hammock in place. thoo thoku he kushesheprarema.

my older brother comes to me and lies down in my vine hammock. ãiwe a huimai, ipa thoku ha a perikeyoruu.

hammock made of vines. thothoku.

the Yanomami transformed into váquiros. yãnomãmi the pe wareprariyoma.

they transformed into váquiros (a type of animal). wareprariyoma.

to dry; to get dry. washitiai.

they extracted the bamboo tip (from the wounded body) and fat came out. tapitapi e ki harayoma.

to grease. tapitapi.

(they two) dried up the water hole where Rahararitawe lived, and he, dying of thirst and crying, ran around because of them. a no hete ha wehemaparini, rahararitawe a amishiri miã kãi rerepiapraramama.

they dried up. wehemaparini.

to improve (health condition). kuyeheai.

we regrouped and threw ourselves down the slope. yamaki ha kokãmoruni, nihoroparukirini.

to gather, to regroup. kokãmoruni.

I arrived after them, they were peeling guama pods and I sat down. ya waro ha hetaikuni, krepo u pe wãri washeaihe tehe ya rokema.

to attack a surface with a pointed object, remove an object that has been introduced under the skin (thorn, parasite of the chigoe flea type); remove the pod of a legume; peel green plantains using nails and teeth. washe.

to stand on tiptoe. hitesheo.

stay where you are, I will walk ahead. miha re a ta kua heiku, kamiye ya huprao pario.

to walk ahead, to go first. huprao.

they make tari, tari, tari. tari, tari, tari. and here they are, arriving one after the other, coming to live in my chest. wa ki kuorani, wa ki peripraai ta kuparuhani.

to arrive one after the other. ripraai.

there is honey upriver (I discovered it some time ago). kiha puu a kua kupohorurei.

upriver, there where there is a sandbank. mrakatahu a re prapohori ha.

the monkey rests (upwards, in a tree). pasho a wãshimi horupohori.

upriver, upwards. -pohoru.

to sleep well. kurara akahi.

to sleep. kurara.

las niguas se desprenden (de los pies adonde están alojadas). ihu nape hayoyai.

niguas. ihu.

(related form). nono.

to be a little firm, to be slightly hard. ﬁhu.

he turned his back on her, Rabipelado threw the malefic substance at her. kuu kãi hayua kokeherouwei (mit.

he gave her the back, turned his back on her. kokeherouwei.

took away. llevó.

to start lifting or separating something using a long pointed object as a lever. iyoreprai.

I express my impotence. ya the pe wã feheprarai ha.

express my impotence. feheprarai.

(it) bends under the weight. ihiru pe wãri pashokou.

to bend, to yield under a load. ashokoai.

stop agitating. a ta yãnikitaru.

to stop moving, to stop agitating. yãnikitaru.

1. To place (something) directly on the fire (without hanging it). 2. To put a sprout back in its place after having extracted the roots or tubers (ocumo or cassava). tirere.

to form a ring or arc with an object. shokemero.

the night fell immediately while the plumón (of the bird) was falling (lit. u pe tishishii tehe yetu ke e the mi titi ha fweshiki tisu.

to fall due to a blow. tishishiai.

I have a cough (lit. kamiye ya toso.

to have a cough. toso.

to be angry. taitai.

construct a large one. the ta praukuku.

the house of the men was large. yãnomãmi the pe hãtopi nahi praukuoma.

to extend, enlarge, widen. praukuku.

to behave like a hekura (evil spirit). payemorãyou.

tuvo que pasar mucho tiempo antes de que el suelo recuperara la firmeza, entonces ellos descendieron nuevamente. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma.

to recover strength, to become firm. hiyakaprou.

upstream speech (referring to a group of Yanomami communities living upstream on the Puutha Ke U river). paraﬁri.

cooked in water (perfective of factitive). hariamarei.

as a heavy rain was approaching, Horonami took shelter. maa a hoã pata huimai ha, Horonami a wehemoma.

to come towards, to approach. huimai.

the son of Zorro guapán was his son-in-law. hoarifanawe ke ihirupi pe hekamapi ke e kuoma (mit.

he let himself fall surreptitiously into the hollow of the tree while his son-in-law was busy removing a thorn from his foot. pe hekamapi misiki e washai tehe a kea hãthokema, hii ka ha (mit.

his/her son-in-law. hekamapi.

the visitors no longer come because they do not give anything in exchange for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

to give something in exchange or compensation, to give an object in exchange for another. koãmaihe.

fill up to the brim. iyekeamai.

(he/she) fanned himself/herself. yahuhuo kuk e i.

to fan oneself. yahuhuo.

we started to go out quickly from the water and then, in a place where they went to eat yagrumo fruits, we found freshly cut branches. rope yamaki ha hashiripraikuni, kepo iki re wanowehei, ihi mohe yoa tute.

as he knew tobacco he immediately recognized what it was. pee nahe tai yaia yaro e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to start to. hashiriprai.

to have walked in the water. karoropariyo.

they found fallen fruits on the ground. rua ke mo hiraa ha tarariheni.

fruits. rua.

he was brandishing a machete. sipara a yarehepoma.

to brandish, to hold over or above the head, to threaten someone by brandishing a machete, stick, etc.. yarehepou.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshokoreãi.

del otro lado Tilingo multibandeado agrandó a su vez la cavidad del peñasco. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

enlarged a cavity. yawetemakei.

when they killed Tiriri, in the place where he "cried" in the form of a guan, his white down turned into weyari, the "demons" of dawn and dusk. titiri a ha thariheni, paruri a miã ikipe hami, ihi ke horoi pe re weyariprariyonowei.

demon of the night. Tiriri.

in the place where the muddy bottom emerges above the water. u katikatipi re repiyeti ha.

muddy bottom that emerges from the water during the dry season. katikatipi.

to have dispersed. rãkokorãyou.

to place two elongated objects leaning against each other. irikikei.

(he/she) stood on tiptoe. mamiki hiteshekei.

to stand on tiptoe for a moment. mamiki hiteshetou.

to stand on tiptoe. hiteshekei.

the Yanomami were far away. yãnomãmi ke the ki payeketaa waikikema.

to move away (perfective aspect of the inceptive form). payorei.

he had crushed a guaritoto against the ground. api ke nasiki wai raipraama kurahari (mit.

a spiny plant (Urera caracasana). guaritoto.

to close (a cavity, opening). wãteteprou.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically (imperfective). imiki yokoai.

the people of Hukowe invited us. hukowe theri peni pemareki nakai kuprehei.

we want to regroup and we call each other. yamaki niya ha kokãmoni pei ke yamaki nakayou kupiyei.

to invite, to summon, to call. kuprehei.

When Jaguar's arms were too short to embrace the tree trunk, he went mad. irariwe ke a pokoku surirou ha kuparuni, a puhi horihoma.

to have arms too short to fully embrace an object. surirou.

to tie a knot, to knot, to tie with a knot. okorekei.

we walked in a long line. yamaki shaiaherii.

to walk in a long line one after the other. shairayou.

to have been torn off in that manner. hahathoa.

to obtain a funerary gourd. fwatoshe he yohoai.

that they give him a funerary gourd without ceremony. e watoshe he yohomai ta perahe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

headdress of the hekura covered with white down. fwatoshe horoi.

1. Headdress, feather crown placed on a novice at the end of their initiation; diadem, colorful crown of the hekura, which can have precise shapes. 2. In certain circumstances (funerary ritual, ceremonial dialogue), a gourd containing the ashes of a shaman is called watoshe.. fwatoshe.

the woman's breasts were firm and erect, she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. suwe hãkãmiki ha sherereikuni, suwe ke a yokoapraroma.

she was walking rhythmically raising and lowering her arms. yokoapraroma.

dogs lift their leg to urinate. hiima pe waku ayatou pe niaasi keyei tehe.

thigh. fwaku.

he went anyway, even though he was told not to do anything about it. the pe ma wasii tehe, a hua he yatirayoma.

despite everything, he shot his arrows at the cows. ware ke ki niyai he yatioma.

to insist on doing something despite opposition or difficulty. yatioma.

(he) began shaving the head of the young man, who was sitting there, (so that he would have) a shaved head. a ruruaprarai ha kutaruni, pe wai puhio ke yaro, he re mãrokoshi.

to begin shaving someone. ruruaprarai.

to lack what is necessary to carry out a task. fimiki nohi wapeo.

to lack what is necessary to carry out a task. nihi.

to loosen a little, slacken. prehuhu.

to wrinkle, to crease. rukuruãi.

to become dense (vegetation); to become obstructed. paimiprou.

Zool. Zool. , small bird of the Formicariidae family. , ave pequeña de la familia de las Formicariidae.

animal. suri.

the great rock is completely smooth. maa ke ma pata si frakahawe totihiw e.

to be completely smooth, to be smooth and moist. frakahawe.

to extend horizontally; to extend a liana from one bank to another of a stream (in order to cross it, holding onto it). karererei.

they abandoned the house after arguing. the pe nowã thayou ha kuparuni pe shurukuokema.

to chat, converse. nowã thayou.

to do it for oneself. rekerei.

there where the fish were, all with their heads (towards the same side), he fished them. yuri ke ki naikiri mi puruhou yaiope ha, ki yokama.

to have converged, to have directed towards the same direction, to have oriented the gaze in the same direction. puruhurayou.

to say repeatedly, to repeat. kutaai.

we went into the water a little downriver. y amaki ithoa korohokema.

a little downriver. fkoroho.

to flatten it. he simitai.

to flatten, to make flat and smooth. simitai.

the visitors no longer come because they do not give anything in return for what they take. yoku wai re mrarihe, the ki no wãi koãmaihe ha.

they have ambushed along the path (upriver). yo ka mamo noﬁ reparihe, a niya kuu yaro.

path, road, trail. fyoku.

fruit of the seje palm. ohaprua.

then they said: "they sleep near here" (= they will arrive soon). pe nowã thamahe.

they said. thamahe.

we eat, then we fall asleep gradually (spoken in the south of the Orinoco). yamaki re iyarariyowei, yamaki re mikeheriiwei.

to fall asleep gradually; to spend the night in the forest during a journey. fmioherii.

to walk in a long line (in silence). prithothoa.

although the hekura goes towards the central plaza. y ãnomãmi the nape huu maopehe ha.

central plaza. maopehe.

to crunch, to eat something crunchy. kãri.

to unravel, untwist, or fray completely (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). kushesherayou.

He has wavy or curly hair. Uu shi wãrihiwe ama.

to have wavy or curly hair. shi wãrihiwe.

ya reconocí la planta de los y a w a r i. yawari re ya pe yããpi hena no ihipia waikirei kuhe.

(por la descripción que le hicieron) reconoció inmediatamente a Siroromi. siroromi a no ihip ia shoarema (mit.

ustedes ni siquiera son capaces de descubrir y reconocer las huellas de los hekura (= ustedes son malos chamanes). hekura wama pe mãyo no i hi pia tapraimi yaiwe (cha.

recognize. irei.

Tocar, acariciar (por afecto, en señal de amistad). hurikayou.

(he/she/it) let drift, caused to flow (perfective). karemai kukei.

1. To let drift with the current, to fish by letting floats drift; to cause or allow water to flow. 2. To assist in the departure of people going by canoe.. karemai.

fruit that can be harvested by knocking it down with a pole. hiyeamou.

a dull roar came from the nest of the mosquitoes (supernatural insects). peti naki no yaripi rororomoma (mit.

to crackle, to produce a dull roar (of a fire burning, wind in the trees, etc.). rororomou.

they penetrated the conuco (crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hay u o m a.

they crossed the morichal (palm grove) and left it behind. eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

to pass, to leave behind, to cross a space from one edge to another. hayuamai.

átenle una correa de corteza en torno a los riñones a mi madre y tómenla del brazo (para guiarla). naye wama poushoku ha okãkini a wãri ta ipipahe.

correa de corteza. okãkini.

to break a piece off a round object by striking it. yaresheai.

to begin to partially fill or empty. hayaroprai.

these palms of pijiguao are not mine, they belong to another (or: these palms of pijiguao are not what we are looking for). hei rasha ke the siki re uprare, shomi ke siki.

no, he said, you are other people. ma, e kuma, shomi wamaki.

other, different. shomi.

when Kreakrea was alone he pushed aside with his hand the leaves that isolated the girl (on the occasion of her first menstruation). kreakreani yipi henaki hãiprai re hearayonowei.

to push aside with the hand something that obstructs the path. hearayonowei.

fishing guaral. nohi yawa.

guaral. yawa.

to keep someone awake, not let them sleep. hihirimomai.

my arm is tired (sore from the effort). ya poko wãshimi.

to be out of breath, to get tired. wãshimii.

hit me on the head. yare he ta shepa.

to hit someone on the head or back. shepei.

to do something for a moment. wãmoretou.

(related form of pei and naki). theki.

he will visit several communities (during his journey). a yahi no hetepraiwe.

to visit several communities during a journey. heteprai.

brother-in-law, do not make me unhappy, break off a little of your yopo snuff for me. shoriwe, yare no preaamatihe, the wai tiiprai mi hetua ta shoaroni.

do not make me unhappy. preaamatihe.

to lie down next to someone in a hammock one after the other. yakataai.

they bathe in the water. nar en el agua (suj.

to bathe. nar.

I did it slowly, without being afraid. kirii mai ya hutaariyoherima.

he/she/it did it slowly, without being afraid. hutaariyoherima.

(speaks of upriver). krepu.

I will strangle you foreigners and pile up your bodies. ya pe orãmi wãri ha shiãrini, ya pe nomawe yototomakei.

to strangle. shiãri.

to begin to tie, wrap, make a bundle by winding a tie around. yãthoriprai.

older brother, they dragged me twisting my arms. apawe yare poko re ãihiprariherihe ye.

they dragged me twisting my arms. ãihiprariherihe.

(lament funerary) (speech of upriver). alowe ke.

lament, funerary lament. alowe.

to get stuck or become hard. wãkio.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the surface of water, behind clouds (celestial body). ururãi.

he/she/it is dead. a waiyorayoma.

is dead. waiyorayoma.

to be hungry. hãihã.

it turns out that, while they were walking, they stuck the big stone perpendicularly (into the ground). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe.

to put the head between the shoulders; to plant, fix, stick in, prick; to fix an object perpendicularly to another; to hook a fishing line to the bottom of the water. pasu.

they came to defend him, otherwise the jaguar would have finished tearing out his eyes. the pe nohi peyerema ha tharei irani the mamo no hokea he yatiroyopi ha.

to defend someone, to protect someone, to come to someone. peyerema.

both are tall and appear (to the sight of others). ke kipi yareheo ha yaioni, the kipi wawetou ha yaironi.

to grow tall, to become tall. yarehe.

something prohibited. paprawe.

to be partially hardened or deformed. prihãã.

forest that is not inhabited. e naha ke pe ã shodo, selva que no está habitada.

not having been touched yet; not having been done yet. shomão.

some quickly reach the other bank (in a canoe). yetu ai the pe kasi iheteaharayou.

to reach the high part of a riverbank (floodwaters). iheteteai.

to shoot a small arrow. rihu masi tiheheai.

I shot an arrow at a guan and grazed it. paruri ya si tiheherema.

1. Small thin palm wood arrow with hardened tip by fire, generally used by children; adults also use it to kill small fish. 2. To scratch, graze, slightly hit (when shooting an arrow). iheheai.

(speaks of upriver) and also it can be The word 'shereka' in Yanomami means 'arrows'. shereka a sho pema mo teﬁape.

llevar una piel de ave en el lóbulo de cada oreja. siki re shoririmore.

arrow. shereka.

to crush a soft object with the foot; to step on a dangerous object. karukai.

a type of tree (Araliaceae), its wood is excellent for fire. mafei.

a woman of Karohi (a community). k arohi theriyoma.

woman (member of a particular village or social group). arohi.

Abanico elaborado con hojas de palma trenzadas, generalmente provenientes de la palma shereka. Sirve para avivar el fuego y, menos frecuentemente, para abanicarse.. shuhema.

to have one. hurukurarei.

do not touch my older brother's axe (= do not steal it). ãiwe wama hãropi koshi wãri hupai mai.

axe (only during a ceremonial speech). hãropi.

I am hot. Ya yoprayu.

to be hot, to have heat. yopra.

when the foreigners had finished eating the Yanomami, they threw out their bones. nape peni yãnomãmi the waa ha hititireni.

to throw out, cast out. hititireni.

arrowhead. kãmãprai.

did they go there then, hungry, looking for food. kiha pe wãri oﬁri taeo mi fua pashirayou ma ta kuhawe.

to go there, hungry, looking for food. pashirayou.

fan the flames and also it can be The word 'popoho' in Yanomami means 'to bristle, to stand on end (hair, feathers)'. koa wake popoho.

when the little birds are hit (by an arrow), their feathers briefly bristle. kirithami pe thao tehe pe popohotou.

fan. popoho.

small vegetable residues mixed in water. koshãkoshã.

upriver speech. Potomawe theri.

upriver. Potomawe.

conserve something inside a package. hãropou.

to purify by means of a liquid. epuriﬁcar.

night fell again and the pain did not subside at all. the mi titia ha koruni wãri ke the nini manaheheproimi.

1. to heal, to get better, to recover (health state), 2. to be convalescent, 3. a little, in small quantity. manahe.

it is necessary that you do it. wa wake ha thapani.

it is necessary to do. thapani.

to become an orphan. wahatiprou.

to improve, to fix, to repair; to order, to classify (perfective, plural object). totihitaakei.

I stayed awake for a long time. ya mamoku reitia.

I stayed awake for a long time. reitia.

the hole in the rock is narrower, it seems. wawa e hena kuprou shoarayoma, yetu ke e.

narrower (hole, cavity). wãkikiprou.

you are always crying. wa shiro eheehemoti.

to cry, to sob. ehemomai.

the dog was called Tokorinawe, it was very big. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

to be called, to have as a name. kuowei.

to have the habit of going to draw water from the same place. hikepraai.

my brother-in-law can repeat to them not to do it. heriye ke a wã no wasiaprarou tao.

to prohibit them from doing something. wasiaprarou.

cleared path. kakeai kukei.

to clear vegetation with the foot to make a path. kake.

to undergo the ritual of homicides. unokaimomai.

ritual of homicides. unokaimorayou.

once he was in the tree he placed his stick across the branches, then tied his arrows (so they would not fall). isi hami a kuo tehe himo ke a so pririparema, shereka ke ki okãi piyeoma.

across. priri.

to cry, to have tears in the eyes. mapu upe hai.

tear. mapu.

to catch the end of a fruit with the incisors and exert pressure to remove the seed from the shell (perfective, plural object). wãthemirãrei.

they tell you to crush them (by striking with something). wa the ãhã patikirarei.

1. to crush, clean or extract by striking with an object; 2. to strike an object with another to crush it, crush by striking with a stick, a stone, the heel of an axe, etc.; to extract fibers in this way (by striking with a stick); to clean a hammock by striking it with a stick; 3. crushed, extracted by striking. patiki.

they shook several fruitless branches. prore e the hiki ha ripukupiatarani (mit.

shake (once). ripukai.

(he) grabbed the head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to split in two equal parts. huhetiprai.

father-in-law, hurry up, when the sun is still low, the bees become visible. e naha the kuo tehe pei re naki wawetoai: suegro, apúrate, cuando el sol todavía está bajo, las abejas se hacen visibles.

father-in-law, stepfather. hoape.

a small, silvery fish with a reddish belly from the Characid family, full of spines and used as bait by fishermen. misi iyeiyerimi.

Pájaro váquiro (a bird) took a shortcut going straight through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

the two women went straight there taking another path. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to take a shortcut through the forest. tiheri.

1. to become numerous, 2. to make in large quantities, 3. numerous (state). yahara.

I'm going to look for river crabs. oko ya pe wai ta hupaheri sho.

to search for, to look for. hupaheri.

Dioclea guianensis (Leg. kuhãwe hakosi.

tree. hakosi.

while they were eating honey, Yãri went very far away. thomiriyoma ke a wã wãhami a kopema.

to go very far away, to move away. wãhami.

you who are always inhaling hallucinogens (= you who are shamans), look for the house of them (= look for the house of the hekura). kihi wamaki re epenamoti wamakini pe yahipi ta taa totihiapotuhe (cha.

the house of them (= the house of the hekura). totihiapotuhe.

to introduce a small stick into a burrow to make the animal inside come out. hishãprai.

to introduce a small stick into a burrow to make the animal inside come out. hishãprai.

perfective of the inceptive (beginning of an action). suprarayou.

mother-in-law, isn't the wapu good to eat. yapemi, wapu ke ki mihitaimi thawe. It has been soaking for a long time. the no nohi teteapiyei.

mother-in-law. yapemi.

he is irritating. a no wãri hushuai.

they are unbearable. pe pe no wãri hushuai.

to be unbearable, to be insolent, to bother, to annoy, to irritate. hushuai.

to lie down for a moment one against the other. hohãthãtou.

he cut it in two with a knife. sipara sini the hãniprarema.

cut it in two. hãniprarema.

to sit in the water with legs open upon arriving. yetu ha wapu locativo vhvrayou.

to sit in the water with legs open. vhvrayou.

"I'll do it later", that's what the gallineta must have thought. "waiha tao", hãshimo ke wa puhi kuprarou no yaionowe (mit.

must have thought. yaionowe.

1. To become weak. 2.. yauaai.

to rise up in great numbers. yorukuai.

catch termite soldiers by inserting a stick into their nests, they will eat them. oshe wama akaki ha hishãni pe akaki he oape.

catch the oshe aka termites and offer them to my brother-in-law (for him to eat). oshe wama akaki ha hishãni, shoriwe akaki ta hipekihe.

to capture termite soldiers by inserting a stick into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). hishãni.

he fell into the water and drowned. a ha keparuni a mishi tupariyoma.

fell. cayó.

they prepared gourds, as they intended to consume pijiguao porridge on the way. horokoto a kopemamahe, rasha u pe riyã re koaheriiwehei.

he has the intention of passing by here again (he said so this morning). pe niya hayuo koo ke a kuprei.

to do something before leaving, to intend or desire to do something in the near future. riyã.

when Õmawe and Yoawe appeared, the monkeys got angry/upset. omawe ke kipi ha petariyoni hoashiri ke pe hushutariyoma.

they got angry/upset. hushutariyoma.

There were swampy areas over there (I saw them long ago). miha heãhãtu ke pe praa kurarei.

past tense, long ago. rarei.

the cambur compote is becoming completely homogenized. tate uku si uhutitiai.

to become soft or smooth to the touch; to become homogenized, without solid particles or grains (liquid, powder). uhutitiai.

to be very hungry. fratafratawe.

the demons of the night passed. weyari pe re hayuyonowei.

the demons of the night passed. hayuyonowei.

the dog, large and beautiful, lay (dead) on the ground. hiima ke a pata wãrishanawe yeepraa yaioma.

lay (dead). yeepraa.

to be cracked. hãthothowe.

to be cracked. hãthothou.

I knock down milky sap fruits with a stick. shamakoro ya hirikai.

to knock down something with a long stick, to harvest fruit by knocking it down with a stick; to scratch or scrape something with the tip or edge of an instrument, making a downward motion. hirikikei.

moku pesi pou ta shoaima: bring the cartridge case too. moku pesi pou ta shoaima: trae también la cartuchera.

cartridge case. cartuchera.

I will not claim any bamboo arrowhead from you while they are mourning their dead (lit. pe puhiki yikitio tehe, eha ipa rahaka a ta hiipa, ya kuu mai ke the.

to be very afflicted by the death of a relative; to cry for a dead relative. yikitio.

to have a bad face (either due to illness or worry). puhi ehepiai.

to separate the toes with the hand. mamiki kakatai.

to tear incompletely, to tear at the edge. kakamawe.

in an instant we went to look for wood, then I went quickly to collect the leaves (that I needed to cover the roof of my shelter). yetu yama the ãshope ha pathothani, yetu yãã re ya henaki perema.

to work together; to exchange goods (during a trade). pathothai.

I divide the tobacco leaf into two (by tearing it along the central vein). pee ya nahe ayakosiprai.

to divide into two equal parts. ayakosiprai.

to obtain a funerary gourd. fwatoshe he yohoai.

that they give him a funerary gourd without ceremony. e watoshe he yohomai ta perahe (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

headdress of the hekura covered with white down. fwatoshe horoi.

1. Headdress, feather crown placed on a novice at the end of their initiation; diadem, colorful crown of the hekura, which can have precise shapes. 2. In certain circumstances (funerary ritual, ceremonial dialogue), a gourd containing the ashes of a shaman is called watoshe.. fwatoshe.

to peel the seeds of the yopo plant. prushi.

women, I beg you to participate all (in this activity). suwe gos y burdamente puntiagudos en un tallo de pe ta haikiprou ta totihiro she.

to participate in activities (in the forest). hãitho.

I will not go with them. ya huu nareo mai ke obthe.

I will not go with them. obthe.

shaken object, shaken tobacco leaves (in order to remove excess ash before preparing the wad). yaisa no.

to shake off (e.g. ash from tobacco leaves). yaisa.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco) language. mashipima nahi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). mashipima.

to make the inside slippery. takramarei.

to divide in two. shekereprai.

you waited for me. ware no tapou hea kupiyei.

wait here. a no ta taiku.

he waited for the woman. kama yahi hami suwe ke a no tapoma.

to wait, to expect. tapou.

(upriver speech) firewood. koã ãkosho (habla de río arriba.

firewood, logs. ãkosho.

they had put themselves one next to the other and Macagua was looking at them. ke kipi upraa thãriritariyoma ha, prereimariwe ke mamo wãri re hutariyowei.

to put oneself for a moment next to the other, to decide to put oneself like that. thãriritou.

for fun, to tap a termite nest with the hand so that they fall on someone's head and bite them. he yoothopei.

to tap or flick with the fingers to remove dirt or insects. yoothoai.

to have the habit of moving in pairs. kororotou.

add this to what you have just offered me, so you will return with empty hands and walk quickly. hishiroko ke wa yei yauape, ei the ta itheria shoaki.

to add something on top of what has just been offered, to give in addition. yauape.

brother-in-law, above all do not insinuate that it is dirty. shori, shami himai tikootihe.

above all, do not come to visit with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

do not insinuate, do not say. tikootihe.

to be burned, to have suffered a heat stroke. frãnãpiai.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

to have the eyes turned or blank, to look with anger, to look at someone askance. poruhu.

good word. orawe koko.

word. orawe.

fishing line, fishing thread. uheya ãsitha.

hook. uheya.

peeled yopo grains. hiprushirarei.

to lighten it. hereheam a i.

to lighten. hereheam.

to trace a circle, to spin. shimoreãi.

(he/she/it) becomes many. yateheai.

to become many. yatehe.

moriche palm. Mauritia.

to do it (divide something by pulling in opposite directions with teeth and fingers) in order to give it away. wakokokei.

there are lightning flashes. the mi yãmimou.

to occur repeatedly (lightning). yãmimou.

Grated cassava dough rolled up to dry over the fire. kohipe (pei): harina de yuca amasada y enrollada para ponerla a secar sobre el fuego.

Pulp of grated cassava. kohi.

laid an egg. umokoyoripirayou.

"wa, wa, wa. "wa, wa, wa. ", the váquiros walked in a line one behind the other. ", ware ke ki kuu kãi tutuatayoma.

we walked in a line and heard the women crying. yamaki re tutuaiwei, suwe re pe miã kuoma.

they walked in a line one behind the other. tutuatayoma.

am I not here like a frog or like a mapanare lying on the ground. the wãri yoyo yerea ta kurani, the ki aroami praa ta kurani, the pe wãri ma ta kuorani.

I never think of going to share fish at my older brother's house, I do not say that. ãiwe iha yuri ya e ta ria sho, ya kuorani kunomai.

to say, to tell. kuorani.

the fish that swirl around in large quantities (= the fish that swim in large quantities in the river). hei ki re shurirorati (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to flutter, to be stirred up or agitated by the wind, to swirl around in large quantities. shuriri.

he had not been lying in his hammock for long when the rope of his hammock broke and also it can be The word 'perio' in Yanomami means 'to live or dwell in a certain place, to get into a hammock'. a perio mori no tetehetou tehe, a peki thaki hetii kukei.

hammock. perio.

to be thin. hitihiti.

the son-in-law left first, and his father-in-law followed him. pe hekamapi e re pariprariyonowei, pe shii e re nohãã shoakenowei.

followed. shoakenowei.

to form a callus. poshoai.

the arrendajos (birds) of yellow back (lit: the arrendajos of back yellow bright). ishãromi mope herasi re frãrewei.

in ancient times the people of the white-backed arrendajos were the owners of the light-colored pijiguaos (birds). ãyãkorãri mope re herasi re auwei mopeni rasha auaurimi pe hapa thapomahe.

red, reddish. herasi.

to become happy. puhi owehetou.

to become happy, satisfied, content (upon receiving good news or a desired gift). owehetou.

the people of the red partridges in turn rubbed the colorant on with their fingers, and likewise painted the edges of their eyes and feathers. pokorari ke peni pei mamo kasiki, pei mahe pe hami kãi, the pe wai hãhihãi piyekomahe.

to rub the skin with a finger or hand to apply a colorant. hãhihãi.

to crackle. shãiãmor.

to reach an excessively ripe state (plural objects). poshoropirariyo.

(he/she/it) has been panting. hereheremorayou.

to breathe rapidly, to pant. herehere.

to go. akeke.

to be hungry. konoka.

to sharpen, make sharp; to make rough or coarse. namomai.

1. To separate, tearing off with the hand, the breast of a bird. 2. To peel green plantains or bananas with the hand.. kerokeromo.

plantain compote cooked with the ashes of a deceased person (lit. koai (habla del sur del Orinoco. : honey of ripe plantains). ) tate puu.

ripe, mature (for plantains and peach palms only). tate.

hekura associated with the howler monkey. iroriw e.

the people of the howler monkeys (myth). irori.

to partially surround. hãyokei.

venomous snake, Bothrops sp. (Viperidae). waro.

community divided into two groups, whose members reside in two dwellings very close to each other. poakao.

incest. mota.

we were in the fogón (fireplace) of Thão. thão.

a proper noun or place name. Thão.

to make scream with pain. hiyohiyomomai.

to become hazy/misty. ukosiãi.

eructar. epreteãmou.

it is said that the feline died (suddenly) when it was still standing. ira a terekeo shoao tehe a wãhã nomarayom a.

two of us advanced crouching to observe the rahara monster. porakapi peni pe opisi terekou tehe, rahara keki mimahe.

to be stopped (animal on four legs); to crouch to advance, or to be advancing like that. terekeo.

serous liquid. uweuwe.

I stopped taking hallucinogens. epena ya pe tiraarema.

because they had not wanted to desist, they began to groan one after the other. the pe wãri tiraprarai ha maoheni, pe rããmou notiatarou yaioma (mit.

to renounce doing something; to stop doing what one used to do. tira.

Cachicamo ate all the honey and left. moro upe waa ha hititirini a harayoma (mit.

ate. hititirini.

breaking a piece off a round object by striking it with the edge of the hand and pressing down. yareyando.

to be twisted locally, to be twisted only at one point. torokai.

(she) kills the konakona ants with embers, striking firebrands against each other (in this example the pronoun wahe you two refers to a single person: it is a mother-in-law addressing her son-in-law). konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to scatter embers by striking firebrands against each other (to drive away and kill ants). yashishai.

the plant of the birds of prey occupies a wide surface. koikoimi henaki pata re upraa re yaweterakiri ye.

to be spacious inside (a cavity, the interior of an object), to occupy an extensive surface. yawetewe.

he/she is spying, he/she is observing while hiding behind something. mi yeheo.

to spy, to observe while hiding behind something. yeheo.

the woman was so afraid that she kept running from one side to the other. suwe ke a kiriri ruaprarou ha tikoikuni.

to run from one side to the other. apraro.

to be skilled in the art of wayamou, to have eloquence. karehe.

to crumble, to collapse. hashishai.

the people of the neighborhood, the nearby communities. fahete theri.

neighborhood, vicinity, surrounding area. fahete.

I decorated the bamboo tip with various geometric motifs. rahaka ya mi onimai.

to paint geometric motifs on the face, to have the face painted with geometric motifs. onio.

he smoothed the tail of the capuchin monkey. wisha ke teshina hokokama.

younger brother, that shaman standing there will rub the arrows, and you will become a good hunter again. prake ha a re u p r aopariyowei, pusi ei ke ki re kui, ke ki re hokokoapareiwei.

to caress, smooth (hair); to massage, rub a sick person during a shamanic cure. hokokorarei.

he returns (to live) with us. a peaai koãyorua.

to reappear after a long absence; to return. peaai.

he renounced, went away angry, and upon arriving put the package of fish to cook on the embers. a hushuoripi kãi ha tirapariherini, yuri e hãro yapaharoma.

desisted, gave up, renounced. tirapariherini.

he is sitting there. kiha a roatayoa.

is sitting there. roatayoa.

the hekura threw the snake very far from downstream, they threw it over everything towards me. hekura peni kihami prahawe oru ke ki sheyei re kukekiriowehei, ke ki re morokãimaiwehei.

to throw over, throw higher than. moroko.

null. kuwatomi.

although I lack matches, I do not say: "I will work to get matches" (lit. ya ma horimou tehe, "pohoroye ya hiki no ohote ta thaa sho", ya kuu mai.

to have no intention of working to obtain something. pohoroye.

during the night the inflorescence of the manaka palm will bend down. titi ha manaka ãthe mi wereprariyo.

to happen downstream. werepraai.

to begin to carry out. pathotho.

to experience again. ãmoku yoothoprou.

to experience again. yoothoprou.

to cover one's head with something and also it can be The word 'horoi' in Yanomami means 'white down'. he horoimou.

his throat is surrounded by white down, like that of the rahara monster. hawe rahara keki kahiki pata horoi krea.

to cover one. horoi.

to get congested, to get stuffed up. hokoãi.

to bend, curve the tip of an object. toyekou.

sorcerers, shamans. okã.

to draw transverse lines, to paint transverse lines. tipruta.

I destroyed (voluntarily) the gourd by kicking it. koa ya hesi katikikema.

to crush with the foot, to kick an object to destroy it (a semi-spherical object). katikamai.

As it was raining, I planted palm leaves in the ground to shelter myself. maa a kei ha ya masikoku ithãk e m a.

to plant, to insert vertically into the ground. ithãk.

to get stuck or become hard. wãkio.

él estaba en guardia y vigilaba los estremecimientos del árbol (lit. the hi tiikou mima.

cortó un palo corto y lo. horotowe hi ha peprarini, hi tikemakema.

tree. borhi.

the corn cobs are short. yono mope torohewe.

to be short, to have an oblong shape. homoto.

to take for oneself, to snatch from someone. hukerei.

that can be cut into pieces. perirati.

to become satiated. poteheprou.

he/she will be found (= they will find him/her). a tarariyo.

will be found. tarariyo.

the hekura went to kill the dog (or: the shamans traveled immaterially to kill the dog). hekura peni hiima ke a nohi washuai ha kuparuheni.

to go to kill; to undertake an immaterial journey to seize someone. washuai.

it took us a long time to reach the last part of the journey and, when we reached the summit of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the summit. hesikaprou.

to bend or twist the edge of a tool. tishikikei.

to distribute (to take for oneself). shekererei.

the sun will decline. mothoka kaiprariyo.

the sun will decline. kaiprariyo.

to have several blisters. si thorohowe.

to have a blister. rohoa.

we climb the pijiguao palms to collect their fruits. rasha yama ki hirirãi.

the old man was dragged dead along the floor of the dwelling. pata a re kui yahi hami a nomawe hiririremahe.

1) to climb a palm or thorny trunk using two crossed poles tied with vines, 2) to strip off a strip of bark by pulling and shaking it, 3) to drag a long object along the ground. hirirãi.

to scratch oneself once with a. hãsiki.

his mother-in-law hurried to go get thin rods for the roof shelter. pe yesini hurohuro e ki kea roparema.

mother-in-law. yesini.

to become mature (referring to cambur fruits). mothoai.

the nutria had curled up in a place where the top of the bank ended abruptly. pe he weyoweyo he horokope ha proro ke a wãri ha hikoikuni.

to be curled up at the bottom of something. horokope.

(related word). shiihe.

it is too full. ya wãcuentra demasiado lleno.

to be too full. wãcuentra.

in the sky, towards the sky; above (in the direction of the sky). fhetu ha(mi).

arriba de la caída de agua se balanceaba el nido de jejenes (peti naki). pora a hetu ha peti naki pesi yãteyãtemoma (mit.

él disparó las pequeñas ﬂechas muy lejos, en dirección al cielo. rihu ke u he rumai ha kuikuni hei ke a hetu h a m i.

sky, heaven. fhetu.

not to make foot in. yarorotou.

be constantly verbally attacking people or hitting one. keprao.

quiten las cuerdas de sus arcos. hãto ke nahi pe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

estar tensada (la cuerda de un arco). hãto nahitha pet i a.

bowstring. hãto.

to be getting oneself painted by someone (perfective). yakiramorãyou.

I provoked the return of the hekura people. hekura ya pe he tatomarema.

to cause to return, to force to retrace one. tomarei.

the peccaries forced Sherekanawe to accompany them. wãre ke kini sherekanawe a re yaumareheriiwei.

they forced (someone) to accompany them. yaumareheriiwei.

give me your machete. siparahe a ta hiyo.

your machete. siparahe.

the curiara (canoe) is handled/managed well. kanawa ke a koromamou totihitawe.

to handle/manage well. koromamou.

he did not take long to approach the place (walking quickly). yetu ke the urihi ahetetaremam a h e.

to approach quickly (by walking). ahetetarefriar.

they (two) followed downstream the river of spells. heritha u ha ke kipi mi werema.

you spend your time going down the river course (to come and steal cambures), when you return. rokomi wama ãsi pe nape hore mi wereweremou ma kui, wamaki wãri ohei kookiriowei ke the.

to have descended a river course walking downstream. wererayou.

to cause to feel sleepy. maharishimai.

the immortal people curl up. akrehe akreteai.

to coil, to curl up. akrete.

I will not demand any bamboo arrowhead from you while they are mourning their dead (lit. pe puhiki yikitio tehe, eha ipa rahaka a ta hiipa, ya kuu mai ke the.

to be very afflicted by the death of a relative; to cry for a deceased relative. yikiti.

at dawn they left, each one on their own, to kill paujíes (from the result I realized that) their harpoon-tipped arrows had not missed the target. paruri pe nape ha huomopotuheni, pe the pe no kroshokroshoprao henaopereshi.

to strike with a pointed object, to spear someone, to kill with a harpoon-tipped arrow. kroshomou.

to do a somersault. mohe hotekeprou.

to do a somersault. hotekeprou.

to take a part for oneself, to have someone offer a part to oneself. hakarorei.

pei. utasi.

to make run. reremai.

to make (something) do (an intransitive action). RVmai.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to start reflecting. piyekeprou.

send your mother there to harvest corn, there where the branches emerge, downstream. kihi ke hiki ora re shorokorakiri hami naahe e moku ta shimiki.

to emerge, to pass over the water (long object, branch). shoroko.

to submerge an object. kaokoai.

Jaguar's cannibalistic hunger awoke when he ate the placentas of the newborns. ihiru re pe nosikini ira a naiki shurukoma.

to awaken, manifest (desire for meat or fish). shurukoma.

position yourself at an adequate distance from him/her. ware pe tikukua.

to position oneself at an adequate distance, neither too close nor too far away (by approaching or moving away). tikukua-.

pronoun. pronom-.

when I am under the effect of hallucinogens, I clearly distinguish the disease demons. hei ya shi wãrii re kurenaha ya kuweni no wãri ke ya pe hirahapou tharei.

to become brighter, to clear up (the sky, the clarity of the day). hiraha.

(perfective form). thãrimai kukei.

to accompany a lone person, to help them. thãrimapou.

to accompany someone, to help someone. thãrimai.

I will come anyway. ya huu kuyeheo mai ke the.

due to what you have just taken out (from me), my anger will not end. pei wa hore ma terehe hushuo kuyeheo mai ke the.

not to modify one. fkuyeheo.

1. To quickly enlarge the surface area of a burn in a garden by spreading the embers and ashes well. 2. To quickly recover an object (in the manner indicated previously). haprarãretai.

they gathered (and then someone said). the pe yototai ha kuparuni.

to gather, to be gathered. yototoo.

you, the cowards, do not make love, let me do it alone. kirishiwe pe wãri, pe wãri kuwemotihe, yãmi ke ya ta kuwemo.

do not make love. kuwemotihe.

to slap repeatedly, plural acts. pairarei.

press your fingers together. imiki ta wikokoiku.

to have the fingers pressed together. wikokowe.

next to, parallel to. poahami.

again, he grasped his arrows. shereka ke ki hurihia re koreiwei.

(speaking of upriver) he grasped the headband made of green tobacco (undried), and took it away. the pata nii ashi re furihireheriiwei (mit.

to grasp, to seize, to grip. hurihai.

to stay underneath, to remain underneath. pehitheprao.

He quickly brought the leaves close, lit them on fire, and burned the bees. the henaki ha ahetetamarini, henaki wake piyemakema, pothothe , yopri puu naki hisikikema: aproximó las hojas sin perder un instante, les prendió fuego y quemó las 1.

to quickly bring something close. ahetetamai.

to bend something upwards, to curve something upwards. yãprekamai.

(perfective form of kaoai) made enter by force. kaokei.

they take each other by the arm. iri misi ipihai.

to take by the arm. ipihai.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to divide something into pieces by pulling it with the teeth in one direction and with the fingers in the other, for oneself. wakokorei.

to say repeatedly, to repeat. kutaai.

they understood well, they comprehended well. fwã shi katehewe hiriãi.

to have understood well, to have comprehended well. katehewe.

tuvo que pasar mucho tiempo antes de que el suelo recuperara la firmeza, entonces ellos descendieron nuevamente. yãkumi re a pitha hiyakaa ha koruni pe ithothoa korariyoma.

to have recovered strength. hiyakarayou.

to shave someone. mãrokoshimai.

when they discover a giant cachicamo, they will asphyxiate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

they will asphyxiate it with smoke. yareprapehe.

mother (more affectionate term). napemi.

the two women took the tobacco without looking. suwe ke kipini mamo maimi pee nahe tepirema.

without looking. tepirema.

it was he who killed him, he expresses his satisfaction. ihini thora a ha kushereni a wã topraa kure.

blowpipe. ihini.

to become blunt, to flatten. pohotoai.

Noise produced by. tootoomou.

I lost my senses from the fat of the cajaro. kaharo tapi ha ya shi wãrirayoma.

you are not in your right mind. wa shi wãrii ma re kui.

when I am truly under the effect of a hallucinogen, my spirit wanders far away. epena peni ya shi no wãrowe wãrioprou tehe, ya puhi prahaai ha totihioni.

to lose one. wãrirayoma.

Tell them to be quiet, some of them insist (on saying they're going to war). a wã no wasio ta poo, ai pe the pe ã he prakehou tharei.

1. To insist on what one said, to not change one. wã he prakehe.

he covered his mouth with white down, and also his chest. pe kahiki horoimama, pe pariki kãi horoimama (mit.

to cover something or someone with white down. horoimama.

his younger brother appeared at dawn. the mi wakaraai tehe pe oshe a re petariyonowei.

at dawn. petariyonowei.

object that can be torn with the hands. kakamou.

to invite. wã no ohiãmo wãno uhutipi (pei).

to invite. ohiãmo.

in the place where the leaves hang down. henaki re teire hami.

to hang down, to bend down, to incline downwards. teia.

to make war. yãri nathasi.

to begin carrying a child on the back, after previously carrying them on the hip (or in another way). ãyoritai.

you will make love many times, because in the place where they go to collect momo fruits they already made love. wa wamotipe, ihi re wama husi pe toape hami wamaki he hiriprai parioma.

to make love. toape.

wing feathers. hakoraki.

The fish is in the water near the rapids (speech from the south of the Orinoco). hei iwa a wãri kãã he re ka eroro (habla del sur del Orinoco.

to be in the water, to be soaking. kãã.

in the center (of the fabric), there where it is dense, the Spider-spirit was crouched. mi thari ha ke e the ki ha sutaparuni, hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri puushitaoma.

dense, thick (in the center of something). sutaparuni.

to move away, to distance oneself for a moment (to avoid a prohibited relative). prahaprao.

parrot, parakeet. kakari.

parrot, parakeet. kakari.

I said I would ask him, although I'm not sure of his response. ya wã wapeprao poope, ya kuma ma re kui.

to risk asking someone for something. poope.

extend the arms. imiki rereke.

extend. rereke.

now the child begins to grow. hei tehe ihiru a hapa preãkããi.

1. to grow a little, to begin to grow; 2. to make a little fat; 3. medium, a little big. preãkã.

to paint something red in a specific place, to dye red. momihi.

his younger brother, who has the habit of going there to visit, was the one who spoke to them. pe oshe, mihami a re huuwei, pe the pe ã keama ha tharei.

to say something important, to inform of a serious event; to make a request (for a good, a favor). kearei.

he lowered the tortuga (making it slide along its body) and said: "come on, bite my chin". totori ke a yohotamai piyeoma: "pei, ware werina ta wetipari".

to make slide down, to lower. yohoãi.

they got up one after another from their hammocks and immediately left. the pe re weyoyoprou shoarayouwei, pe korayoherima.

to get up one after another from the hammock and leave the house together (group of people), to come off and fall one after another (fruits). weyoyorayou.

surely his/her tongue became numb (= he/she does not know how to assert his/her rights, does not know how to express himself/herself). ida.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). yoreriwe.

vegetation for clearing. vegecuro.

to have a swollen lymph node in the groin. moshipepi.

give me a bamboo arrowhead, place it on the end of my arrow, offer me one that you have received from another. weti ipa rahaka shiiwe ke a, e ta hiipari, ipa a he ta torepa.

to take from someone an object that they obtained from another. torerei.

to be at war (lit.: to cause a violent and lasting pain). tihetimapou.

to make a dye darker (usually using soot). no ushiai, inc.

to make darker. no ushiprou.

they attached bamboo tips to their arrows. rahaka ke ki hiihiã ha yairaririni.

let's attach branches with forks to the tips of our arrows (for hunting small birds). rãhãrã pema pe ta hiima.

to attach a point or tip (to an arrow, stick, etc.). hiihai.

hay poca miel, y los nidos están aprisionados en las horcaduras de los árboles. pei u pe wai hãkikiwe.

aprisionados, atascados. hãkikiwe.

to never give up. puhi remoimi.

(to fall). kei (caer).

(to run). rerei (correr).

to do something repeatedly, to pluralize an action. mai.

I was afraid and startled. ya ha kirinarumi ya ãtiprariyoma.

I was afraid and startled. kirinarumi.

brother-in-law. kuyão.

(synonym for rasike). yere.

remember it. puhi ta shoaiku.

to remember. puhi shoakei.

frog; Hyla boans (Hylidae). proãproãmi.

mythological ancestor, owner of curare. mamokoriyoma.

to make a circular motion with the arms; to stir a liquid in that way; to draw a circle (durative). yaporemai.

to fry, roast, toast multiple objects. hãrikirarei.

to clear vegetation with the foot to open a path (upriver dialect). krake.

to dye. teñir.

to tense (the string of a bow). potehe.

(he) tied the legs of the tapir in pairs (to carry it). shama ke a mamisiki warekema.

to tie the legs of an animal in pairs to carry it on the back. waremai.

Carpintero verdoso fue el primero en descubrir el curare. ripuhusiriweni mamokori wa hapa tararei no kureshi.

curare. ripuhusiriw.

I wait for the manioc to mature before eating it. nashi ya koko etemai.

to let mature before consuming (manioc or ocumo). etemai.

to become blunt, to become dull. pohoto.

plural object, tirere- dispersed (sense 1 and 2). tirereprawe.

the house of the enemies (lit. fira ke makayopi o kithanari ke makayopi.

piles of rocks. kithanari.

infested with worms. agusamoshohãwe.

little one, don't bend your legs (keep them spread and straight, as a novice should during an initiation). shetewe, wa roo preprekeo mai (cha.

to sit or squat with legs spread and bent, to be in that position. preprekeai.

when the foreigners had finished eating the Yanomami, they threw out their bones. nape peni yãnomãmi the waa ha hititireni.

to throw out, cast out. hititireni.

the effect of the malefic substance still disturbs me a lot. ya he rahoprou shoaa re totihirayouwei.

the effect of the malefic substance. rahoprou.

to be convinced. hehepou.

it rains very hard. fmaa a sutaai.

to rain heavily. sutaai.

to make smaller, reduce, diminish, cause to melt. kuwetamai.

to carry on the chest. yuri kã.

(the pulp) of the banana is reddish. kuratha a si teãyãwe.

to be reddish locally. teãyãã.

to do it for oneself. tikarorei.

the bees gathered immediately on the celestial disc. hetu misi hami puu nari pe urukuprou re shoarayouwei.

to gather in large numbers. urukuprou.

in the place where there is the waterfall of the váquiros. waretha a pora re yaupe.

waterfall, cascade. yaupe.

to get dirty locally. shamip.

they scolded Horonami because (due to his fault) the bees had already risen to the sky. horonami pe no wã thama, puu naki pe heakaa waikirayouwei ha.

to elevate to the sky, to rise above. heakaprou.

to start tying knots. moshokoreprai.

(it) stops stinging. noshi imããi.

to stop stinging. imããi.

hunt animals (= go hunting). yaro pe ta niyahe.

to hunt animals, to go hunting. niyahe.

the arrow rises above the palm tree. manaka si ha shereka a morokoãi.

to rise above, to become bigger than. morokoãi.

you have to start telling the truth. wa kãi rii ha pehetitaruni.

to start telling the truth. pehetitou.

shaman who loses. puhi yashuai.

shaman who loses. yashuai.

venomous snake; Bothrops colombiensis (Viperidae). karihirima ke ki heã.

I hit to collect honey tima, but the trunk did not open. tima ke ya tuyei ma kure, a paweheprou maa kure.

to open a hollow object, to open a hollow trunk. pawehou.

as the edge of the club was damaged (from the blows it had struck), he turned it over (to use the other edge). himo a roroku wãritiwe ha, shomi roroku re nomihitarei.

1. Change hand, change shoulder (when carrying something); use the other edge of a tool. 2. Succeed someone to receive a share of a distribution, relieve someone carrying a load. nomihitarei.

to give several kicks. kahathorarei.

to be angry. wãroho.

(unidentified vine). koapi ãshithoku.

vines or climbing plants. hithoku.

come here to fan the fire. koa wake ta yareyo.

I'm going to kill the agouti by putting smoke in its den. opo ya yareprai.

to fan the fire, to activate the fire using a flat object (a fan, a bellows, a lid, folded leaves, etc.); to asphyxiate an animal by introducing smoke into its den in this way. yarepei.

the Waika kept me suffering reiteratively. yamareki wãri nini thai ma tharei (mit.

to suffer reiteratively. petaohe.

to have a headache. heki yayuai.

to have a headache. yayuai.

to be resisting with courage. wãrohoo.

to touch once. tiprushiai.

to feel repeated stabbing pains in the stomach. fratafratamou.

when everyone returned she went to show them the path. the pe komi ha koponi kasha ke a mimai mi paoma (mit.

to show, to make see. mimai.

the dog caused the division of the cattle herd into two unequal groups. hiimani ware ke ki tihetirema.

the dog caused the division of the cattle herd into two unequal groups. tihetirema.

to have become inferior (in height, length, duration, value); to have fallen behind, to have remained short of a limit. hawerayou.

to make float. potamai.

to scrape wood locally by striking it obliquely with a cutting instrument, to work a wooden surface in that way. pakoko.

to have become numerous. prukarariyo.

they did not manage to easily lift the large rock. no lograron levantar fácilmente la gran roca.

to lift. levantar.

Ay, my eyes are burning. ya mamo pe fraai re waikia tikore ye e.

to stir, to mix, to agitate (a liquid). tikore.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ke ma kapurashipi.

infested with worms. moshapi.

he just slipped under the rotten wood. rutheruthe a ha a si poiruwe kuhe.

decomposed wood by rot. rutheruthe.

I got blisters on my hand from the axe handle. hãyokoma pei hithoni ya imiki si poshoprariyoma.

I got several blisters. poshoprariyoma.

to have been slit incompletely, to be emptied. ekokoa.

I laid the child down. ihiru ya perimakema.

to lay something down, to make something lie down. perimakema.

los chamanes que vivieron (otrora, en diferentes sitios). yãnomãmi the ki wãri hekura re periprai.

chamanes que vivieron (otrora, en diferentes sitios). periprawe.

the noise fades away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

the noise fades away, diminishing. maanashiaherii.

quédate durmiendo, pues, mientras ellos hacen el amor con tu mujer. suwepihe na ma waihe tehe a miã ta heapo.

tú duermes mientras hacen el amor con tu mujer. wa mamokasiki he ma re hiripraihe.

ya que ustedes tienen mujeres, acuéstense en los chinchorros y hagan el amor juntos. pe wãri ta yãhãhemayo.

to make love. amor.

when they wanted to join the hekura, they left carrying their hammocks. hekura pe rii hami pe waroo puhio tehe, pe shurukou shoaoma.

to leave, to depart carrying one. shuruku.

to carry a child mounted on the shoulders. yakaropou.

I'm going to hurry to form a ring with it. ya the wapepraai ta shos hokekei.

to form a ring or arc with an object. shokekei.

we went down to the River of Rains and went back upstream. maatha u hami yamaki ha iroroparuni, yamaki iroroa mi ha yãmoparuhuruni.

went back upstream. remontamos.

Bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

slightly curved, having a slightly curved shape. parokou.

the shell/skin of a fruit that is cooked over the embers. ehaprou.

chewed tobacco that lost its flavor. nosi tharei.

tobacco. nosi.

to remain seated on the ground for a moment. tirereprao.

to repair several arrows. kateheapei.

to repair, to put back in good condition. reparar.

the voice of the ancestor was coming from the bottom of the den (saying): "Come get me. porepore ke a wã wãri ha paweparutuni: "ware ta koreyo. ". ".

coming/emerging from the bottom/depth. paweparutuni.

while we take care of the firewood, they go to look for termite nests (to start the fire). ãrepo pe kãi teapotayouhe: mientras nosotros nos ocupamos de la leña, ellos van a buscar nidos de termitas (para encender el fuego).

termite nest. ãrepo.

to clean or paint something white (perfective form). aupramarei.

immediately the back of the giant Spirit-cachicamo appeared and disappeared on the surface of the water. w akariwe yaipe pokepokemou shoaoma.

to float habitually (plural objects). pokekewe.

to start to crush or flatten something by hitting it with a stick. yatikiprai.

he suddenly came out onto the path of Aparecido. pore ke a mãyo hami yeture e ha hapraa ha heikuni.

the tobacco grew very quickly and began to flower. yeture nahe ha patarini a raroma.

suddenly, quickly, immediately. yeture.

1. to move blindly, 2. to blind. hosisi.

to make war (lit.: to take each other. tishikãyou.

I was biting my tongue. ya aka wetioma.

I was biting my tongue. wetioma.

Horonami recogió el hacha de piedra y cortó a Cachicamo en dos. horonami poo a ha hokereni moro a pahetiprarema.

stone axe. pore*.

to be twisted only at one point (perfective, delayed inceptive). torokorayou.

tira los chinchorros vacíos (de los hekura que se han ido), inhala alucinógenos, que los chamanes tracen un nuevo camino (para los h e k u r a) y tú te pondrás pesado otra vez (= los hekura volverán a alojarse en tu cuerpo). thoo thoku proke ha, thoku ha hoyarini, epena wa ha koarini, pe no mãyo thai re kopariyo, wa hutea re kopariyonowei.

to make heavy, to cause to become heavy. hutepramai.

they hung. hehãprawe.

to bring heavy or bulky objects close to the place where they will be used. ahetepramai: aproximar considerablemente ahi objetos pesados o voluminosos al lugar donde se 1 vb.

to bring heavy or bulky objects close. ahetepramai.

hi. watanamo.

express one. heheprarai.

to clean one. yãhãheo.

the taste that water acquires when it has remained too long inside a container, the taste of warm water. koa-mou he yauwe.

1. To be weak, to have lost strength. 2. To be flaccid, to have lost rigidity, to be bent (tobacco plant).. yauwe.

(it speaks of the south of the Orinoco river). he hihotho.

to be blunt (of an arrowhead). hihotho.

on the other side Tilingo multibandeado enlarged in turn the cavity of the rock. ai the mashi ha piremarithaweni ke ki ka rii yawetamai mi hetuoma.

to enlarge a cavity, a hole. yawetamai.

I have attacked (or: I have killed). ya ishorayoma.

we will attack today. hei tehe pemaki ishoa shoarayou.

the mosquitoes bite (lit. ukushi pe ishou.

to attack, to aggress; to kill. ishou.

to start scratching with nails, generally to remove red spots caused by biting insects. tisikamorayou.

ocelot. yaomi.

I really wanted to break your ribs (with the back of an axe). pe repokosi mori sheai re a ma kui.

they went to this place to open the rua fruit shells (by hitting them to extract the almonds). rua mo sheai re kukeyoruuwei (mit.

to hit in a specific place; to break spherical objects by hitting them with a hard object, to break fruits in this way with a stick or stone. sheai.

(see related forms). hesika.

He was determined to go. Niyorãyou wake huu.

determined. niyorãyou.

to do it in the central plaza of the communal dwelling. noshi takakapei.

to clear the ground, to clean it, to leave it clean. takakarayou.

to collapse, to fall down. hishishi.

to be completely crowded (a place). hithokowe.

they kindled the fire. koa wake pe yarea shoapemahe.

they kindled the fire. shoapemahe.

he pushed aside the logs (at the base of the roof) and went out. koã ãshoku ha hãiprarini, a harayoma.

to push aside with the hand something obstructing the path; to reject someone with the hand. kreakreani.

to place something on the edge. kasiakei.

he let many striped catfish escape (lit. pruka araremi pe tokuhamama.

to flee repeatedly in different places (a hunted animal, a fish). ftokuhai.

he entered the rabipelado's den and came out immediately. opo pekapi ha a ha rukerini, a he hapramai koã re shoarayouwei.

1. To come out immediately after having entered. 2. To make the end of something come out, often by piercing. 3. To lead into, to arrive at, to enter (a path that ends in another path, a stream of water that flows into another). he hapramai.

he is angry. posi ka komami.

to be angry. komami.

you all live upriver. wamaki ma re orapiyeheri.

to be located upriver (from the place of utterance). orapiyeheri.

por allí se reunen muchos váquiros. heyeha ware ke ki manikou totihia kupiyei.

to have filled up to the brim; to have become numerous. manikirei.

I descended the other slope. ya mohe hotepariyoma.

to descend a slope. hotepariyo.

the dog caused the division of the herd of tapirs into two unequal groups. hiimani ware ke ki tihetirema.

causing a division into two unequal groups. hakaproduciendo.

to unravel, untwist, unthread completely. kushesheprou.

he does not stop ruminating his anger. a hushuo yorikotii.

to become very angry (and . yorikiprou.

to cut down a tree. manakoro.

vomited (perfective). wekekerayou.

food that has been cooked in that manner. frãrãrãma.

to crush partially something with the incisors (perfective aspect of the inceptive, plural object). washishiakei.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to get out of a canoe, to set foot on land, to get out of the water. washirio.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). tishiko.

fohi himou: to manifest that one is hungry. fohi himou: manifestar que se tiene hambre.

hunger. naiki.

to pass from night to day, to begin (the day). the haruu uheheprou.

to pass from night to day, to begin (the day). eheprou.

the little turtle set foot on land and they grabbed it. totori a wai ha washiritaikuni, a wai ha hurihireheni.

they grabbed it. hurihireheni.

(speaks of upriver). krepu.

1. to start swaying (an object planted in the ground), 2. to shake an object planted in the ground, to pull it out or check if it is firmly embedded, 3. to have become unsteady. hãweke.

I take a little rooster. kakara ke ya ihirupi teai.

I take. kakara.

The sun made it dark. Potepiamai ke rai.

to become dark, to take on a dark shade, to get tanned. iai.

it is still a young tree and also it can be The word 'hi' in Yanomami means 'tree'. huya ke hi.

it is. hi.

the man was lying in his hammock fixing arrow featherings. yãnomãmi shereka a he haomai kãi peritioma.

lying in a hammock. peritioma.

the ancestors rushed towards the place where there was a cacao tree. pohoroa ana hi upraope ha poreri ke pe re priririkei.

again the Waika rushed to leave. waika ke pe pririrou kooherima.

to converge rapidly in the same direction; to rush towards the same place. puhuru.

who is there when it's night. hei a titi re kui, weti a wãri roani.

to be, to live, to inhabit a certain place. roani.

after having camped in the forest he returned to live in the communal dwelling. a kãi peria fa totihitaikuni, a kãi fa shaponoikuni.

to come to live in the communal dwelling after having camped in the forest for a more or less long period. shaponoãi.

to begin to speak well in ceremonial dialogues. karehai.

fruit from which several damaged parts have been removed by incisions. hikorema.

they were cooking váquiros when suddenly another herd approached. ware pe hariihe tehe, ai ke the pe re ikutakeiwei.

they were (still) cooking váquiros, when another herd approached; I was heading to a place where there were numerous tembladores. ikutakeiwei.

to tie, to bind, to fasten with a very tight knot or loop. prohohoamai.

fruit of the seje palm. haprua.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). ikãkã.

to make dents or concave marks in several places. wãhihirei.

the tree is getting caught on another. hi mi thorukuai.

to walk with a hunched back (due to age or a heavy load being carried). fhuu mi thorukuwe.

to bend, curve, fold under the effect of a load (branch, tree, person, etc.); to have a hunched back; for a tree to get caught on another when falling. mi thoruku.

Did you uncover the tobacco plants when you went to the garden. hikari hami waheki huu tehe pee wahe naheki he karorarema.

to uncover, remove the covering leaves from transplanted tobacco plants. karorarema.

to move from hearth to hearth, to make the rounds of the central plaza. ãyorii.

they (the hekura) could not lift the great rock easily, and it oscillated (in their hands). pei maki hereheprai ha maparuheni, pei ke maki pata keaprarou kupariyoma (cha.

1. Make a light object that is being manufactured. 2. Lift a heavy object easily. hereheprai.

in. etehe.

to split, to bifurcate, to become bifid; to partially split the end of a long object to make it forked. pakaraai.

(they) shave the head of the young man, when he goes to the forest. a ruruaprarai ha kutaruni, pe wai puhio ke yaro, he re mãrokoshi.

to shave the head. mãrokoshi-.

he is completely cured. a temi heikiaguacate.

he is completely cured. heikiaguacate.

ay, our voices slip (= sink) under the ground. pemaki ã he wahoai tikoaheria.

to slip, slide, sink. tikoaheria.

the ancestors transformed into laziness. poreri ke pe ihamarariyoma.

to transform into laziness (mythological). ihamaprou.

to rub something with the fingertips to remove an adhering material (like wet sand, dirt, mud, etc.). horokorarei.

The shamans do not cure any sick person, none of them attacks the disease (saying krashi while striking it). the pe nohi reai mai, "krashi.

1. A blow struck with the edge of a tool; a shout uttered by a shaman who is healing a sick person, when fighting against a supernatural being by striking it with the edge of a tool. 2. To strike with a machete, to cut with a machete.. krashi.

everything that lives or grows in the forest. honoho.

Apply the medicine on the wounds. Posa horã hesi sobre las heridas.

medicine. horã.

to fall gravely ill. reirayou.

to roll a leaf into a cone shape. hoshoko.

to leave the end of an object deformed; to roll up, to fold up. wãpretãmai.

(lit. mroosiri (lit. the people of the flies). el pueblo de las moscas).

fly. mroo.

to have felt nauseous. harihipariyo.

to be very angry. romoromo.

to become disheveled, to become unkempt. poruku.

Children and adolescents of both sexes cannot eat its meat. Los niños y los adolescentes de ambos sexos no pueden comer su carne.

agouti paca (a type of rodent). lapa.

to shell corn (perfective, plural object). hushirarei.

the path follows the stream. yo hiririwe.

to be along, to follow the edge of a stream (a path). hiririwe.

I will go. pithatherimi.

come here to press it against the ground. eyeha mashitha hami a wãri ta hikikiyo.

to compress, crush, press against the ground, keep an object in place by applying pressure with the hand or placing a weight on top. hikiãi.

to break into several pieces. yãrãrerei.

to be agitated on the surface. hirehire.

to search for crabs (upriver dialect). okonarimi.

to burn, to suffer a burn, to turn brown from heat. frãnãpirayou.

if you sleep without fire you will get elephantiasis in the testicles. wa ruwemou tehe wa natheki wakapirayou.

elephantiasis in the testicles. ruwemou.

Cha. Cha. , alcoholic beverage of the hekura (lit. , brebaje alcohólico de los hekura (lit. : the beverage of the yawari). : el brebaje de los yawari).

a type of alcoholic beverage. yawari.

He took the placenta where the two twins were and hid them immediately. rró la placenta donde estaban los dos gemelos y los escondió en seguida.

hide. hithe.

to have itchy rashes (perfect aspect of the inchoative verb). shihitipirayou.

To cause (through negligence) the softening of a cassava bread. wihihi.

to snore, to crackle (the fire). frãrãrã.

in a short time Lizard felt the effects of the poison and slowly became limp, hanging upside down. yetu re a yuai ha kuparuni, rehariwe a mi wereariayo.

to suffer the effects of a substance (hallucinogenic, poison) or an illness. yuai.

they took him then to a savanna. pirisi a hami a kãi hoã waroa mahikemahe.

savanna. mahikemahe.

to shorten (by losing one of its parts, breaking). pusutuprou.

I am afraid. koãnaye ninihi.

to be afraid. koãnaye.

the river is at its highest level (or: is full of water). u petiwe.

to be full; to be at the highest level (of a watercourse). petiwe.

when he arrives at another community, the effect of the pore henaki plant will cease abruptly. shomi theri pe rii ha a koprou tehe, pore henaki wayu hetirayou.

to cease (the effect of a hallucinogen). wayu hetiai.

only some were able to quickly get out of the water. porakapi totihiwe ke kipi washiria re ropakeiwei.

to disembark, to get out of a canoe or water. washiri.

(he) transports his two children in the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemapou.

to transport something placed on top of something else; to carry a child seated on top of a load. tikemarema.

I observed that you had given a hammock. amaka ke wa ki ma re hipekenowe thai.

you had given. hipeakenowe.

when you want to drink, enroll a leaf in the shape of a funnel (to collect water) (advice from a shaman to a young initiate). mãu re wa u koai puhio yaro, yãã wa hena ha oshokoreni.

to enroll a leaf in the shape of a funnel (to collect water). oshokoreni.

Mujeroso hormiguero, whose pubic hair was even visible from behind (because it was so abundant and long), was her mother-in-law. teperiyoma e weshi pe he re hapramonowei, pe yesi e kuoma (mit.

to have pubic hair growing. weshii.

sin. kashora.

Move in a line (and silently), like the chachaos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to align oneself, to line up. shaninikei.

to swell slightly (as the skin after an insect bite). shimokorerariyo.

snake, Sapa aguacero; Helicops angulatus (Colubridae). Small venomous snake that is often found in water. Its bites are not fatal, but can cause the loss of a finger.. sikapi.

to submerge his/her head forcefully in water. the ki hamisha.

to submerge someone. hamisha-.

he cut the baby's umbilical cord and, without delay, lay down with him in the hammock. ihiru e shiki re hãniprareiwei, a yakaa re shoatareiwei.

he/she lay down with him/her in the hammock. shoatareiwei.

he slept. tharerayou.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to snore. hohoruãma.

the female váquiro ancestors were moving in the center (of the herd). wareriyoma mi ãmo hami pe huma.

designates a female hekura or mythical ancestor. -riyoma.

The banana is completely moldy. Tha kɨrɨ ohore.

to be completely moldy. ohore.

to be very angry. kreikreimo.

to start to grow. primomo.

the moka frogs are mating (mounted on top of each other). moka pe yehihiwe.

to carry on one. yehihiwe.

mientras el loro estaba encaramado, mientras estaba en la punta de su palo. werehi a ma roo tehe, a ma hiio tehe.

encarama al loro. werehi a ta romaki.

loro real; Amazona ochrocephala (Psittacidae). werehi.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to be divided in different places. shetekeprawe.

to burn a single place in the conuco (swidden). patikei.

to get stuck in the mud, to get bogged down. kawehou.

green (color). riyeriye.

no. mpo.

put (plural objects) in the center. mi tharimai.

to put something in the middle, in the center. tharimai.

to have made oneself painted with those lines. hahetimorãyou.

when the belly of the woman exploded the pieces flew. poreriyoma ke the maka pata homoprou ha kuikuni, the pe tipuruwe yeokema.

object long broken into several pieces. tipuruwe.

to put completely yellow, to dye or paint completely yellow (perfective form of the factitive verb). ashimakei.

the tucans have the tip of their beak curved. mayepi ke pe husi mi ora ma re wereawei.

curved, bent downwards. wereawei.

within a moment the sun will descend there, in that place (of the sky). waiha, iha mothoka yahatotoprope.

to descend to the ground. yahatotoprou.

to wrinkle, to wilt. haa.

when we get tired of staying in ambush, we regroup with the others. yamaki reo ha mohipraruni yamaki kokãmoã re korãyouwei.

to gather, to group together. kokã.

those big-mouthed fish that move, I will go fishing for them and give them to the Waika to eat. hei nape mãrohã ki re yaraape, ya ha yokeprarini, waika riha ya e wamai ta yaio.

shake the tail (of fish that move). yokeprarini.

to remain behind for a short time. koroprao.

as a heavy rain was heard approaching, Horonami took shelter. maa a hoã pata huimai ha, Horonami a wehemoma.

to take shelter from the rain. wehemoma.

Are you still feeling afraid. wa kirihou he yatia kure.

to insist, to persist, to do something despite an obstacle or warning. yatia.

supernatural beings of the yai the class, can cause diseases and take possession of a person. hekrãtahu.

disperse only upriver to look for it. ora u ha wamaki shiro ha kuomopotuni a ta taeihe.

disperse. kuomopotuni.

we slept until dawn, and then descended the mountain. yamaki re miã he haruawei, yamaki timiparekirio.

descend by a slope. timiparekirio.

to be hungry. yawatoa.

cuando ustedes lanzan los demonios de la enfermedad (no wãri) en dirección a seres humanos, éstos convergen hacia ellos (para contaminarlos). no wãri yãnomãmi the ki rii hami wama the ki sheyehai totihio tehe, ihami the ki wayu mi prukaoprou totihio.

1. to converge, 2. to give many gifts to the same person, 3. to become numerous, to grow in number, 4. to take, give or receive many objects or many parts of food. prukaai.

to leave wet repeatedly. heretaamai.

to scold, to reprimand. yimika wãriãi.

to scold, to reprimand. wãriãi.

I don. pehero.

the women grated the cassava, put the dough to dry (over the fire, during the night), and early in the morning they cooked the cassava bread. suwe theni nashi re fiki ha firikikini, fiki ha shirikiparini, fiki rãmai re fenapraonowei.

to grate (upriver speech). firiki.

guardar algo cubierto, conservar debajo de. rehami.

to drag an object to the edge of the water. shaiparei.

to pretend not to know (perfective form). mohotumorãyou.

I placed sticks under the ugly buttocks of the (unborn) child, and Rumirumiyoma wove a basket to enclose it (= I killed the fetus in the mother's womb). kana ke hiki ha ihiru ya posi wãritiwe romaparei kurei, rumirumiyoma ihiru pei ke a pesi ha tiyeaprani.

female spirit associated with cloudy weather and rain; she is the mother-in-law of Titiri, the demon of the night. rumirumiyoma.

to fold paper. mamisiki yoreke.

to fold. yoreke.

he brushed the stick quickly. himo the kãi hirikiã ropaa re yairareiwei.

they did it locally (sense 1), plural object. hirikirarei.

to leave something to cool down. pothothoprou.

to be locally smooth. frakahaa.

divide to offer. shererekei.

you will suffer mutually (during the cremation) with this eternal fire. wamaki no wãri preaamayou pera.

eternal, immortal, endless. preaamayou.

to grow, to fatten up until reaching a medium size; to go from a large size to a medium size, to reduce in that way. proweheai.

if you go I will miss you. wa koo ha pe nohi iyotarei.

to miss (a person, a lost or stolen object). iyotarei.

to run extending the arms in front of oneself for protection. fimiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

extending the arms in front of oneself for protection. rerekewe.

they are the ones who will do it. kama peni the thapehe.

they will do it. thapehe.

if other people arrive, I will put my hammock in the carrying basket, cover it, and then go live elsewhere. yãnomãmi re the pe koprou tehe, wii re a ha ya the ki he ha yohokuni shomi hami ke ya no kua totihirayopi.

what does she say we should keep covered. weti ke the pe he hoã yohopou.

to cover, to cover over, to overturn a container (so that its opening is facing down). yohoai.

They walked in a long line, one behind the other, in silence. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihii.

to become hard like leather, to twist, to deform. prithotho.

I put a cover on the pot. to utami ya si ka he raai.

to close, to cover for a moment. ratai.

I'm better now, my health continues to improve little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to improve after an illness; to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). haroherii.

he is worn out, eroded (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). waruhurayou.

Cachicamo ate all the honey and left. moro upe waa ha hititirini a harayoma (mit.

Cachicamo. moro.

out of so much anger, they turned their backs on each other. ke kipi hushuo humapi reomopotayoma.

they turned their backs on each other. reomopotayoma.

I place the pot on the ground. hapoka ya si ithããi.

to place a deep container on the ground; to offer food that is inside a deep container. ithomaparei.

las palmas manaka rodeaban la base de un pequeño montículo. e ha, manaka yahatoto hami the pehi kãi ha tiwaroikuni.

rodeaban. tiwaroikuni.

the honey gushed out immediately. puu ke u pe hirekea re shoarayouwei (mit.

to jump, to gush out. hirekeai.

to be sharp, pointed. shiriri.

the ground broke right at the place where the ugly man was squatting. wãritiwe the wãri re roowei ha a mashitha hetia re he wetirayouwei.

to break, crack, split in multiple places; to come to an end, terminate (a surface). wetirayou.

he was walking in the lead, and they said to him: "That's him. ya the no ihipirei kurei, the ha pariparuni: "ihi nashomi ke a. ", and he fled. ", ya kutariyo kurei.

in the lead, at the front. ihipirei.

to get oneself painted by someone. yãprãmorãyou.

to make a large quantity of. thetheprai.

it trembles, shakes. u rayukou.

to tremble, shake. rayukou.

to fold the legs of a dead bird by turning them so that the claws hook behind the thighs (to carry it on the back). yorekea.

to roll up in a spiral. yapureai.

Aheanariwe ran opening a path through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

mythological ancestor. aheanar.

to paint a transverse line on the body. yaprutao.

term.. ushuhuprou.

to share the food of others (joking). fw are a ni hoã re oore.

to share the food of others. oore.

the jaguar howled in pain and rubbed against the trees. ira ke a rããmorayoma, hii ke hiki hami a hãrikiãprarama.

rubbed against. hãrikiãprarama.

the "Whites" never give nothing for nothing. nape ke peni no mai ha the pe hipei taomihe.

give nothing for nothing. taomihe.

straight. rahaka*.

dormirse inmediatamente. miprakei.

to clean the sole of the foot by rubbing it against something. kakekai.

extender las alas por un momento. hehehetou.

Siroromi arrived (near the woman) when her husband was hunting and also it can be The word 'kopema' in Yanomami means 'without weapons'. pe heãropi a rãmi huaai tehe, siroromi a kopema.

arrived. kopema.

Yoawe was observing when he perceived a woman. wãrishewe ke mamo yeo tehe suwe a tararema.

I observed the path for a long time. pei yoka hami ya mamo yetaoma.

to look at, observe, watch. mamo ye.

al regresar ella reconoció el lugar en donde se habían sentado. pe kãi roope hami the no ihipia re koreheriiwei.

recognize. koreheriiwei.

the humans desire to illuminate it. mayepi pe komi ha toreroimani.

they desire to illuminate it. toreroimani.

I will tell the women to go kill fish (in the lagoon). suwe pe rii ha yuri ya pe shemararei.

to kill fish. fyuri shei.

to lean two elongated objects against each other. hirikiãi.

to tremble, vibrate superficially (like a gelatinous material when impacted or shaken laterally), to perform a gentle oscillating or vibrating motion (like a spider web trembling in the wind). riiriimorãyou.

to begin to tie, wrap, make a bundle by winding a tie around. yãthoriprai.

the rocks are covered with moss. maa ke ma kapurashipi.

infested with worms. moshapi.

I'm going to hit you in the side. pe sherenaki shekei.

to hit someone in the side (lit.: to hit someone in the lung). fsherenaki.

it is there where the fire burns, where the bubbles rise to the surface of the water (lit. miha ke wake yea kure, ei u pata porirou.

to rise to the surface of the water (bubbles). porirai.

when they discover a giant cachicamo, they will asphyxiate it with smoke and eat it. waka ke a wãri ha tarariheni, a wãri yareprapehe, pe wãri wapehe.

to be blown away by the wind or an air current. yarerai.

you will put him face down at the entrance and search for his lice (lit. pei yoka ha noma wa e pe oai reope.

to search for lice, to pick lice. reope.

he obstructed the oriﬁce of the hole where Rabipelado was. nãro re pekapi re horeawei ha e the ka he kahukema.

to close an oriﬁce, to wall up. he raai.

nostrils. hiyokaki.

oriﬁce, hole, opening. oriﬁcio.

to make something dry, to dry several objects. washitimai.

to cut the end of a long object (by sliding a tool back and forth or applying blows from top to bottom). tipuruai.

to leave an activity unfinished. kuyeprao.

to scratch oneself repeatedly. tikekerayou.

she picked a tender leaf from a tree. hukereni : ella cogió una hoja tierna de un árbol.

pick a good amount of pijiguao fruits from the bunch and cook them. shimokore wa ki ha hukereni, ki ta tupa.

to pick, to pluck, to gather. hukereni.

to dance in the central plaza during a festival with another community, to participate in a presentation dance. shuwahimo.

to be habitually prohibited around something. ãyotamarei.

to be a bad shooter. nimi.

this has the smell of a capuchin monkey. the ni kurisipisini.

capuchin monkey. kurisi.

something heavy presses against my sides momentarily. miki ya pariki ha the hute yakaroprao.

to envelop, to pass by one side and the other (momentarily). yakaroprao.

to pierce through clouds or fog (the sun). homo.

Baba cooked in the jungle. urihi hami iwariwe kasha e hãro ripiprai yaioma (mit.

jungle, forest. sel-.

he refused to give the knife. sipara si a noshi imãpoma.

he/she refused to give it. imãpoma.

in the morning he killed a tapir, he called the others who butchered the animal. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema, ai pe ha pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni, shama a pakekamahe.

calling us to gather. pakekamahe.

I will go away. ya no mraa shoarayoherii.

he is always absent (or: he is always late). a no shiro mrati.

1. Disappear, evade, stop being present. 2. Delay, be absent for a long time.. mrati.

to be at a higher level, to be a little higher up. yutehe.

to be cold. wahatuai.

to clean the inside of an object. yarumai.

to be about to widen progressively towards the edge. eheteprai.

to strip a large splinter of wood from a standing tree. pahathomai.

they live a little further upriver. pe peria orahatayoa.

they live a little further upriver. orahatayoa.

he fell ill and almost died. a ha perini a mori nomarayoma.

almost died. nomarayoma.

perfective of the inchoative (to become blunt gradually by successive impacts). pohotorayou.

the (old) thin woman was curled up in her hammock. poreporeyoma ke te wãri tureketaoma, the wãri puushitaoma.

to be thin. turekewe.

we started working, we built the temporary shelter. yamaki kea shoakema, yama nahi thai shoapema.

to start working, to attack. kei.

to imitate the double of a person who has become ill due to the loss of their noreshi, to seek the lost double of a person. noreshimorãyou.

(while Jaguar was climbing, they inflated the tree trunk). ira ke a pata torerea ha yaiikuni, apia hi pata hirimapii re shoakeiwei (mit.

to swell, inflate, dilate. hirii.

one does not deny anything to one's father-in-law. pe shii the pe iha the pe shi imamou taomi.

his/her father-in-law, his/her mother. shii.

he put a bunch of pijiguao fruits on his back (to carry it). rasha e ki yehirema.

her husband had tied together two bunches of pijiguao fruits and carried them on his back. pe heãropi e naha rasha ke ki pata ha parekereni, a yehipoma.

to carry on the back. yehirema.

in an instant we went to get wood, then I quickly went to gather the leaves (that I needed to cover the roof of my shelter). yetu yama the ãshope ha pathothani, yetu yãã re ya henaki perema.

to work together; to exchange goods (during a trade). pathothani.

they wrapped their excrement in leaves and threw it (over the roof). shii pe ha hãromaheni, the pe hãro sheyemahe.

they wrapped their excrement in leaves. hãromaheni.

if they had been sorcerers (okã) they would not have done anything to you, they would have simply blown poisoned darts at you (with a blowgun). okã peni wa pehi sheyeai mahei, the pe wãri prothoprothomorayou.

to repeatedly blow poisonous substances through a blowgun at someone. prothoprothomorayou.

to have hair. miki prukakaai.

to have hair. prukakaai.

to be deep. ka taro.

the man was moving without ceasing to vigorously squeeze Siroromi. naki siroromi the iha yãnomãmi the ãkikiãpraroma.

the man was moving without ceasing to vigorously squeeze Siroromi. ãkikiãpraroma.

to have an urge. ihe.

to be dirty, stained. fãhi.

Jaguar was left behind, and arrived weakened by hunger. ira a pata naikiripi he yaharokowe koprou heokirioma.

to be weak, without strength; to have lost vitality; to have wrinkled due to the sun (a tobacco leaf). yaharokowe.

row of woven leaves in a bundle. tehosisiãprarama.

to be partially moldy. rohoroa.

to glue, to stick (two objects). sutiprai.

expr. foru kahiki wariyoma.

venomous snake (lit. foru ke ki yai.

little brother, don't stray from the path, watch out for snakes. oãsi, a paatihe, oru ke ki.

snake. foru.

I would cry if you went away. wa taprou mararu ya miã ikipe.

to go away, leave. mararu.

extinguish the flames and also it can be The word 'rãiki' in Yanomami means 'to carry'. koa wake rãiki.

I carry the child. Ẽ rãiki a pihio.

extinguish. rãiki.

to paint several circles on the body. tipikiprou.

he left at dawn. the mi ha haruruni the wãri koã henarayoherima.

at dawn, early morning. henarayoherima.

dark, obscure. weyata.

small bird that is starting to grow feathers. harukupiprou.

his arrows always hit the target. a yaketoi mi.

to never miss a shot. yaketoi.

to be hungry. praroimi.

they kill a game animal and will stop having a desire to eat meat. wamaki yaropi wãri ha sheni wamaki naiki mraape.

to have a desire to eat meat, to be a cannibal. sheni.

tree; Pouteria sp. (Sapotaceae). makararo.

we, those who pass (the river), are the people of Shitoshito. s h i s h ito theri yamaki re hayuope (mit.

those who pass (the river). Shitoshito.

the children eat the pulp of the cucuritos scraping it with their teeth. ihiru peni kareshi pe wãhehãihe.

to do it quickly. wãheheãrei.

now the enemies (lit. hei tehe yaro a re yãmooimi, makayo a ha a shi wãrima.

malefic beings related to the piles of rocks, they take possession of the pei mi ãmo of human beings. makayari.

Piles of rocks that are sometimes found in the forest and make walking difficult or even dangerous. makayo.

to dye light red. shopohoai.

butterfly. furafura.

I just stole banana plants for myself. kuratha ya siki kararu thomiã re ayarekirihe.

to steal something for oneself. thomirei.

they penetrated into the conuco (crossed it) and left it behind. hikari theka ha the pe he re hatakeiwei, pe hay u o m a.

they crossed the morichal (palm grove) and left it behind. eteweshi siki hami pe pe hayuyou kuperei.

to pass through, cross over, leave behind. hatakeiwei.

it took us a long time to reach the last part of the journey and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

we stopped for a good while at the top (of the. hesika hami yamaki uprahataoma.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain, to move along a ridge. hesikai.

to become shallow, to decrease in depth. resiprou.

to harvest tobacco leaves. yeri.

Oso hormiguero se quedó dormido con la cabeza echada para atrás sobre un viejo tronco de árbol rojizo. hii amarokoma ke a si pata teãyãwe ha teperiwe ke a wãri hore miã kãi mi ha rekekeikuni.

to become slightly reddish, to turn reddish. teãyããi.

Jaguar was sleeping with his head tilted back. ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma.

to have a side, to be tilted. werehe.

to make love (a woman) (lit. fnaka pata yãshãmapou.

certainly it is here where she has made love. eyeha the kahiki pata yãshãmapou ayaonowei ke the.

to have open, to keep open. yãshãmapou.

they were about to hit them on the nose. pe hushipe mori tuyema.

nose, snout. hushipe.

immediately, the otter began to swim under the water. proro a si ururuã shoarayoherii.

to move slightly below or above a surface, to move under the surface of water, behind clouds (celestial body). ururou.

the fish will be spicy. yuri a nakiprariyo.

it is spicy. the naki.

the noise is loud (or high-pitched), it is noisy. the ã naki.

1. to become stronger, louder (noise); to become spicier, more pungent; to become acrid (smoke) 2. to make stronger, amplify a noise; to season with pepper, make spicy (tobacco) 3. strong, loud, high-pitched; spicy, acrid (smoke), pungent (tobacco). nake.

he will carry only a machete. sipara ke a pou yawereoheripe.

to do something alone or in an isolated manner, to carry a single object. yawereoheripe.

fruits of the wãrãko tree, edible and appearing in large clusters during the dry season, resembling large grapes and velvety. wãrãko ã.

a type of tree; Pourouma sp. (Cecropiaceae). wãrãko.

unfortunately, it just disappeared. a wãri mraa re tikoruherihe.

disappear. tikoruherihe.

cry loudly (a child, due to a strong scolding, or exaggerating for a scolding or a simple refusal); let out a collective shout. huthei.

I'm going to have wavy lines painted on my body. ya oni eyekepramou.

indicates that the subject is about to have something done to them by someone else. pramorayo.

to clean, wipe, erase, dirty entirely. hãhirarei.

with those bambués inkema, clinados haré puntas de ﬂecha e inﬂigiré heridas. pe ihirupi a suhaaiyepe ka ha tharini.

él les destrosentó los lomos a todos los niños. auihiru pe mi krea haikirarema.

to finish, to complete, to grab, to take everything, to eat everything, to give everything. haikai.

plural object (of stretching cotton fibers into a crown shape). uturarei.

place my mouth on top of that. pei ke wa femaka ha yare kahiki makea totihire.

to place on top of something, to place on a fire or rack. makepei.

the hekura started smiling. h ekura pe kasi watetoma.

to smile for a moment. waterayou.

they insist on repeating that, that's what I'm saying. pe ã he yatiatihe, ya kuu re a kure.

they insist on repeating it. yatiatihe.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco). toki.

child. niño.

the daughter of Pokorariyoma searched the house during the absence of the others (lifting objects, leaves, logs, etc. pokorariyoma ke theepini the pe hãshãemai ha heaponi, kasha ke a wai tosheshewe hokea ha heareni.

to lift and displace objects (dead leaves, logs, etc.) to look for something underneath them. hãshãeãi.

the feline roars. ira nosiyeãmou.

to roar; to yell like a feline during combat or when warriors line up in the central plaza. nosiyeãmou.

cotyledons of the momo fruits. momo pei shinahe.

cotyledon. shinahe.

to form a ring or arc with an object. shokemero.

the child is hungry. shirãkomi ãmosi henaki.

to be hungry. ãmosi.

to cure someone. haromarei.

he crushed the bee cells, crushed their excrement, and then squeezed the wax between his hands. a r u pe kãi hukukaturou, pei shipe kãi hurukama, nasi pe ãhuhãi.

to squeeze something between the fingers or against the palm of the hand; to squeeze the juice out of a fruit in this way; to squeeze the grated cassava pulp to remove the juice, within a cloth held in the hand; to deflate an object by pressing it between the hands. ãhuhãi.

to stretch, to extend. ehethaki utu.

the plantains were exhausted and they went to camp in the forest. kuratha e rii ha mrarini wãyumi pe ayoma.

to disappear, to be exhausted. mrarini.

the hekura prepare magical substances. hekura peni heri a kopematurahe ke.

magical substance. kramo.

he grabbed his head and tore it off. the he ha huwereni, the he huhetiprarema.

to break, to split, to tear off. huhetiai.

he got pricked by thorns while walking through a very dense area. paimi hami a huu tehe a misikipirariyoma.

got pricked by thorns. misikipirariyoma.

to be very angry. kirãkirãmi.

I have the impression that the plantains are beginning to ripen. kuratha pe nami hapa shopoherii.

to begin to ripen. shopoherii.

I am hungry. shinari* uko.

to be hungry. shinari*.

crushed, extracted by striking. patikano.

with the chest covered with white down. oromashiki.

hurry up to hold the mortar (so that it does not wobble) with a short log. kiha the hi ta paihitarihe, koã ke hoshokore ãsho horotoweni.

to roll up a leaf into a cone shape. oshokoreãi.

"Bring us mañoco. kuu: "¡tráigannos mañoco. ", we say. ", decimos.

mañoco. ohiri.

to bend in two. toyekeprai.

the noise of branches breaking from a storm was heard (southern Orinoco dialect). fwatori pe pata re kreikreimoperei (habla del sur del Orinoco.

the noise of branches breaking from a storm. kreikreimoperei.

to be short, to be shrunken, to be low and rounded (an object); to be short in stature (a person). hatakawe.

to become iridescent, shimmering (perfective of the inceptive). terererayou.

maleficent supernatural being, cannibal, devours the pei mi ãmo that shamans deliver to it. watupariwe.

the urine caused the tearing of the leaves. pei re niaasi peni yãã henaki hetimai kupariyoma.

to break an elongated object by applying pressure, to tear, to produce a tear or rupture. hetimarei.

Siroromi arrived (near the woman) when her husband was hunting. pe heãropi a rãmi huaai tehe, siroromi a kopema.

was. huaai.

wã piyekai: 1. wã piyekai: 1. To repeat the same information in different places. Repetir la misma información en distintos lugares.

2. 2. To jump from one topic to another in a disorderly and confusing manner. Pasar de un tema a otro de manera desordenada y confusa.

to repeat the same information in different places; to jump from one topic to another in a disorderly and confusing manner. wã piyeke.

(spoken in the south of the Orinoco River. uokimou (habla del sur del Orinoco. ). ).

to be deep. uoko.

go away, get going, I started to feel chills (= I'm sick). pei ye, kuhamihe she, ya si re sãihipraruhe.

to shiver, feel chills. si sãihi.

to start making clear or translucent. erushiprai.

my husband. demoheãroye.

my husband. demoheãroye.

ceremonial discourse. miyoma henaki.

ceremonial discourse. miyoma.

insists on the act. pasurei.

it was he who held my head under water. kamani yare mohe kaokoam a.

to hold an object under water by pressing down on it, to keep an object underwater by placing a stone on top of it. kao.

pointed extremity of an arrow shaft (lit. . hayu.

the butterflies invited the chigüires to a party. kayufanariwe peni hurari pe shoamahe.

butterflies. kayufanariwe.

to rise to a higher level. yuteheai.

to wait for fruits to soften in order to harvest or eat them. prehepiamai.

not manage to fall asleep. shimakamo.

acquire reflections. frãihi.

to put food in the mouth that is held in the palm of the hand, to catch an entire prey with the mouth (animal). wahahuarei.

although it is briefly first I will inform you, open your ears you who carry a bird skin on your back. onohowe ma kui, the ã hoã wea pariparei, siki re yehipoimi yimika thaa ta pariri.

briefly, for a short time. pariparei.

to have a worried or furrowed brow. yakukou.

brother, let's go eat honey, you will collect it. ãi puu pema u pe ta watu, wa poape.

you will collect it. poape.

to masturbate (a man). pikuku.

his older brother gave us two food. pe ãiwepini pehereki iyamama.

gave food to. iyamama.

he separated several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to separate a banana shoot to give it away. tikarekei.

don't put the fishhook in your mouth, because you might swallow it. uhea a hopotihe, wa suharei.

to have the urge to vomit. suhaha.

to urinate in successive spurts by compressing the penis with the fingers; by analogy, to make love, to ejaculate (jokingly). sirisirimomai.

to split or crack open lengthwise (an object). ikrãkã.

to start making something with a wide surface. thepahaprai.

to be very angry. kreikreimo.

they make the earth crumble to reach the otter. proro a wãri pakekaihe.

to cut an animal into pieces; a completely butchered animal. pakeka.

paint my face red with annatto dye. yare mi ta momihiki.

to paint someone. momihiki.

to have fruits knocked down for oneself with a pole, to receive fruits that have been knocked down with a pole. rekepei.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to divide, separate, split apart. teke.

(he/she/it) reinforces. yasusuai.

to start reinforcing. yasusuprai.

reinforce a roof to make it waterproof by placing palm leaves on top. yasusu.

to converse, exchange news in the course of a ceremonial dialogue. wãyou.

Get out. a ta hari.

Get out!. hari!.

it wrinkles, it creases. si wãikiãi.

it has wrinkled, it has creased (terminative). si wãikiprou.

to wrinkle, to crease, to deform, to wilt. wãiki.

to be reaching adulthood (a large bird). koriromaãi.

when the Mount Mãiyo emerged again (after the waters of the flood had receded), the ancestors could not contain their joy. mãiyo keki wawetowe shatiai ta no koopereshini, poreri wa ki ãmoku yokekou ta no yaiopereshi.

a mountain. Mãiyo.

to injure one. hãrikiprou.

associated with the ceremonial dialogue. hiriki posheriwe.

associated. hiriki.

to bristle (feathers or hair). mãriri.

ay, la mujer tenía tanto miedo que no paraba de correr de un lado para otro. suwe ke a kiriri ruaprarou ha tikoikuni.

to continue the same act while moving, or to repeat the same act in a group in the same place (spatial discontinuity). aprarama.

butterfly (diurnal). uwãuwã.

to tell someone to let someone else pass. fhayuamamai.

that day like today, it never ended. ei the ki haru re kui, the ki haru mranomi.

to disappear, to cease to exist, to be exhausted. mranomi.

to express oneself fluently during a ceremonial dialogue, to be eloquent. kahirao.

housefly. potoma.

I took away banana shoots (of the kuratha species). kuratha ya si kararu thomiã re ayarekirihe.

I took away banana shoots (of the kuratha species). ayarekirihe.

to scratch. ka komãprou.

he entered the dwelling at dawn, after having left his large carrying basket outside. yahi ha a haa henapema, sipo ha wii a pata ha hewemapani.

to leave something at a distance, to leave something in the forest before entering a dwelling. heweai.

to be a little firm, to be slightly hard. hihutiwe.

to offer, to give. t topei.

to offer, to give. tope.

he consumed all the bones (of his own incinerated corpse). oshohore ke ki hititiararema (mit.

they exhausted all the firewood. koã the ãsho pe hititiararemahe.

all, entire, complete. hititi.

He left off working on the feathering of his arrow to offer him a wad of tobacco. pe nahe e ha hipekini, shereka a he re huhekeiwei.

1. To get rid of something, abandon something (in a specific place). 2. To temporarily abandon a task.. huhekeiwei.

to obstruct. ka komãtou.

give the order, they will do it. pe ta nosiyemoru, pe the thaprahe.

to give an order repeatedly. nosiyemotaai.

he fell into the water and drowned. a ha keparuni a mishi tupariyoma.

drowned. ahogó.

to have the reflex of responding immediately to a shot or a blow. nokaprai.

to have gotten dirty locally. shamikei.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other (durative, plural object). mi wereheam ai.

to tie one end of a hammock higher than the other. wereheam.

hacia la parte de arriba de la pendiente. fmi nono hami.

pendiente. mi nono.

luego tienes que colocar varios leños por encima. koã ke wa ãshoku makekea heakaa ha mahirini.

to be placed on top of each other. makeprawe.

make the child sit. ihiru a ta romaki.

I perched the parrot. shukumi ya romakema.

to make sit (a child), to perch (a domestic animal); to wait for a bird to perch (in order to shoot it with an arrow). romaki.

the yawari (a type of animal) also behave like shamans, they sing and dance like shamans. yawari pe kãi hekuramou.

to behave like a shaman, often under the effect of a hallucinogen; to sing and dance like shamans. hekuramou.

when Siroromi got up, he immediately immobilized him between his thighs. siroromi ke a hokeprou tehe a hututua ha piyereni.

to squeeze something or someone between the thighs. hututuai.

to be angry. kokopirami.

we fled running. yamaki rereai kuaaherima.

to run, to flee running. rereai.

(the water) becomes covered with a film. si hererepiai.

to become covered with a film, likely due to bacterial or microorganism activity; water mixed with numerous plant particles. hererepiai.

(synonym for yakeke). yakeke.

let go, release. fufe.

to incline the head to receive a blow from an adversary. he mi teio.

to hang, to incline, to bend. tei.

to embrace with the arms, legs or feet. wapu tiprusharewe.

to embrace, to hug. tiprusharewe.

to crackle. shãishãimou.

and if I kept the gourd pressed against the ground. ya ãshi ta patetepou ta yaio sho.

calabash, gourd. shiãma.

you just felt fear. wa re kiriraruhe.

you just felt fear. kiriraruhe.

to be partially hardened or deformed. deprithothorayou.

The anteater lay on its back to sleep. Oso hormiguero se echó de espaldas para dormir.

to lie on one. rekekeo.

to kill. fwãrihotho thap r a i.

to be angry. yorekitira.

eat honey. puu upe ta wari.

to eat. fsheri.

To be covered in dew. heuheupi.

to go ahead in reco-. pomiãi.

to make limp. kayeheamai.

I clean the tube for inhaling drugs (by removing it from the inside with a stick). thora ya ka hishãi.

What if I put a little stick in his anus. ya pe posi wai ta hishãpraa sho.

to probe a burrow, to clean a tube by inserting and agitating a long thin stick. hishãi.

to make oscillate to make fall, to make a person fall by pushing them violently. atate.

I beg you to pile up the firewood here. e y eha koã ãsho ta hirapraahe she.

firewood. hirapraahe.

I desgrano maíz (I shell corn). yono ya mope hushishai.

los granos de maíz están apretados (en la mazorca) (the corn kernels are packed tightly on the cob). yono mope sute.

maize, corn. yono.

¿cuántos hay. weti naha the kua.

how many. ¿cuántos.

to have a turned eye. mamo henowe.

to have a turned eye. henowe.

path located on a mountain slope. fyo tiwarowe.

path located on a mountain slope. tiwarow.

to decide at last or cleanly locally. ayatou.

as it was raining heavily I was wet and chilled. maa a ni wãrowe kei ha totihioimani ya ni hereri preaamai ke a kuhe.

chilled, frozen. aterido.

si no preparan un ovillo de algodón no obtendrán una olla grande. ana pata wama a teai mai ke the.

preparar. wama.

they came to see (monitor) this path. hei re yo wãri miãkeyorumahe.

they came to see (monitor) this path. miãkeyorumahe.

después de una corta ausencia, él franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda trayendo una cesta llena de frutos momo. momo ke pe pata thari ha yehireni, the horetou re korayouwei.

he franqueó de nuevo el umbral de la vivienda. yehireni.

to make vegetation move while moving. prayokou.

to stretch out (a line). yashokoai.

to dent or deform in multiple places (perfective, terminative, plural object). wãukumararei.

I was watching the arrows with bamboo tips that were aimed at us. ya mamo shatioma, rahaka ke peki re puruhuoperei.

arrows with bamboo tips. shatioma.

they caught them, but they escaped anyway (talking about the south of the Orinoco river). the pe wãri hore ma huwemaiwehei ke, the pe he hore hihoatarou he yatioherii.

to relax, loosen, undo. hihoprou.

he arrived at the Monte-de-los-saltamontes at sunset. sekisekimapiwei the hehu hami a he weyama.

to arrive at sunset, to stay until sunset. weyama.

estaban raptando a su hermana y él permanecía indiferente, en su chinchorro. pe yai pe shaimaihe tehe a mohoti peritaoma.

raptando. shaimaihe.

to crouch resting the heels on a log. pariparima.

poles that are placed on the side of the roof of a temporary shelter. Both rest on the triangle formed by the initial structure. pariparima.

bow made from wood that is not hard enough. faraasi nahi.

immature, unripe, not hard enough (for making bows). araasi.

keep the head down for a good while. teitao.

you will take these arrows when you participate in a long hunting trip. wa henimou ha wa ki pope.

to participate in a long hunting trip. henimorayou.

he/she is afraid. yimikaki* ashewe.

to be afraid. yimikaki*.

to place the two closed fists between the thighs and against the genitals (to protect oneself). fimiki huuhuo.

to place the two closed fists between the thighs and against the genitals (to protect oneself). hishã.

Miel appeared, with her body beautifully painted with a reddish-yellow tint. yãmonãmãritawe a oni frãihiwe totihitawe.

to have the body painted with a reddish-yellow tint. hahewe.

I was observing them attentively. ya the miã totihiaprarema.

eye. miã.

The gallineta kept distracting the gaze of the ghosts. hãshimo no porepi pe mamo re yakemarati.

duration at a distance. rati.

he unraveled some fibers from the end of his hammock (and said): "Mother-in-law. thoo thoku he kushesheprai ha shoaroni.

to unravel, untwist, unthread, fray. kushesheai.

adult age (growth stage of large birds). koriromaprou.

to prick (once) with a pointed object the meat being boiled, to facilitate the release of blood. there.

small sticks could be inserted into our vaginas. yaiopiwei.

small sticks could be inserted into our vaginas. yaiopiwei.

many paujíes took flight. paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

took flight, flew away. yeprariyo.

when I fell back after jumping over a pool of water, I stepped on a snake. hawathokoma a ha ya ha yutupraikuni, oru ke ki praope ha ya ki peshoku re katikir e i w e i.

pool of water. peshoku.

go away, get going, I started to have chills (= I'm sick). pei ye, kuhamihe she, ya si re sãihipraruhe.

to have chills, to suffer regularly from feverish chills. sãihiwe.

to get caught on the bottom (usually a hook). shatipariyo.

to be rapidly invaded by vegetation. wãkererayou.

to swell and harden the belly until it hurts. ipreteai.

"nos va a despellejar", pensó él. "yamareki si niya ikekai".

to skin, to peel. mo*.

I approached to put a bamboo tip on my arrow, I thrust the tip into the shaft and sat down next to the fire. rahaka ya ki pamai mi tishishi ukukema, yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to approach each other to confront in combat, to fall due to a blow. tishishii.

he is angry. apapa siki.

he got angry. hapapatherimi.

to be angry. apapa.

if you, inhabitants of neighboring communities, were to make war, the young people would not withstand such a situation. yahitherimi the thayomai totihikema, hei ihiru pe kamishi oo mai ke the.

to make war, to shoot arrows at each other. thapraai.

the pulp of those cambures is too hard. hei tate pe re kui pe shãhe amatopi.

fruit whose pulp is abnormally compact or hard. amatopi.

amontonen las hojas, ¡nosotros las esparciremos de nuevo. the hena pe ta yototoamapotuhe, pe the he patherio koope ke.

to scatter, spread out, extend. patherio.

I'm better now, my health continues to improve little by little. hei tehe ya herehou, ya wãisipi haroherii.

to improve after an illness; to stop feeling oppressed (during the unokaimou ritual). haroherii.

los Monos capuchinos manoseaban el cuerpo de la mujer. hoashiri peni suwe ke a hupepraramahe (mit.

manoseaban (they were groping). hupepraramahe.

the path forks. yo shekerewe.

the path forks. shekerewe.

to succeed someone in a job, in a ceremonial dialogue. nomihiprou.

vamos, vamos, aprende ese breve discurso. pei, pei, horotowe the ã ta titiparihe.

learn that brief speech. titiparihe.

no hay hombre valiente (= no eres valiente). a wãri waitheri periami yai.

río arriba (en la montaña) aquellos bichos que se llaman jejenes, son realmente agresivos. ora hami peti the pe wãhã re kuawei, the pe waitherio ha yaioni.

comportarse agresivamente. waitherimou.

aggressive, valiant. waitherio.

perfective causative of . hotemarei.

"the path follows the Toprai river upriver", they say. "toprai ke u ha mãyo mi yãmoã kurayoi", the pe kuu.

upriver. kurayoi.

Siroromi arrived again, this time carrying two paujíes on his back. siroromi ke a koã kopema, mãrãshi ke kipi parekea piyepema.

carrying on the back. piyepema.

to produce pots. turerai.

to speak. mi were.

he has departed. a hurayoherima.

he has departed. hurayoherima.

he pushed it with all his strength. ikãri a shei shoaoma.

pushed with all his strength. golihiru.

brother-in-law, they will be unable to endure that. s h ori pe the pe puhi rohothomapou taomi.

to be impassive, stoic (in relation to pain, danger); not to show one. rohothoo.

the amo of the movable lands approached me (with a determined purpose). wareriarriba.

give me one of that kind. hei nashomi a ta hiyo.

you will say: "it passed near such and such rock". "hei nashomi ke ki ha a hayupariyoma", wa kupe.

so-and-so mentions your personal name in public. wa si poai ke a re kuhe, ihi nashomi ke a wãrini.

class, kind, type; can refer to a place name or personal name and is translated as . nashomi.

to get down from the hammock and line up in the central plaza before leaving for a war expedition. wayu ithou.

dart. dardo.

to move the head from side to side (in a sign of negation). yomiko.

to get stuck in the mud, to get bogged down. kawehou.

to become slippery (inside of an object), terminative aspect. takraprou.

to tear the segments of palm leaves into thin strips. asgar en tiras ﬁnas los segmentos de las hojas de palma.

to tear into thin strips. asgar.

to fall heavily to the ground, to be crushed by falling to the ground (a single object). tikuhou.

pequeño, abre la boca. shei, kahiki ta rereparu.

open the mouth. rereparu.

displace yourselves in a row (and silently), like the chachacos. hawe poshe ke wamaki shaniniã prihãã ha totihiikuni.

to be aligned in a row (durative aspect). shaninou.

my brother-in-law sang all night to the hekura spirits. shoriwe a shaporimou he haruma.

to sing and dance like the hekura spirits, to transform into a hekura spirit after inhaling hallucinogens. shaporimou.

to become rough, granular locally. ererekei.

to have used the aphrodisiac to seduce a woman. kumirei.

all the salt formed a deposit at the bottom of the water. sayu komi hushomi hami pe papeheoma.

to deposit, to decant, to form a deposit. papeheai.

to speak (southern Orinoco dialect). mi weya.

cold, frozen. preyurapi.

the ta hiyo: give it. the ta hiyo: dalo.

paruri a kãi re hariiwehei, ipa pei pariki hiyohe (southern Orinoco speech): those who cooked the guan offer me a piece of breast. paruri a kãi re hariiwehei, ipa pei pariki hiyohe (habla del sur del Orinoco.

give. hiyo.

to start flattening the end of an elongated object. tatahaprai.

Pájaro váquiro (a bird) took a shortcut going straight through the forest. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

the two women went straight there taking another path. shomi ke yoka hami suwe ke kipi he tiheriproma.

to take a shortcut through the forest. tiheri.

I claim the goods, while the demons of dusk reject my hands. weyari pe wãrini yare imiki hãiihe tehe, ya ta nako sho.

brother-in-law, it is not safe for you to grab my arm, because if you do, we will push each other away. shori ware poko teai mai tao, shori peheki hãihãyou kupei.

to reject someone, to push someone away. hãiihe.

he speaks to him shouting (from the south of the Orinoco). yare nowã rayemai mahei.

to address someone shouting, to speak to someone dominated by anger. rayemai.

he slept. tharerayou.

it is traversed. shi pratapratamou.

to be traversed. pratapratamo.

in the morning he killed a tapir, he called the others who butchered the animal. shama ke a pata niyaa henararema, ai pe ha pokomireni, pe ha waroikuni, shama a pakekamahe.

a child crying in the absence of their parents; to cry for the dead. pokomou.

1. large quantity of food. 2. Defend oneself efficiently, resist with courage. wãrou.

female spirit that knows all named places and accompanies shamans when they travel to other communities to kill, and intervenes in conflicts. kahirayoma.

the butterflies expelled the peccaries upon arriving (at their home). hurari peni kayufanariwe pe yashuprai re kupeherouwehei.

they expelled/attacked upon arriving. kupeherouwehei.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

to bite suddenly the bait (a fish). yomiãi.

to put at a higher level (terminative). yuteheprou.

to fan a fire. koa wake yare.

to improve a little (same inflections). wahuhu.

to improve a little. wahuhu.

to be sloping downwards; to have one end higher than the other (hammock). werehea.

they abandoned the path to hunt paujíes and get feathers for arrow plumes. pe rãmi paokei, paruri imisi pe kãi niya ha niyaheni.

to abandon the path, to walk off the path. paokei.

(a) Yanomami siroromini. siroromini yãnomãmi.

a mythical being, a kind of forest demon. siroromini.

pedos tienen siempre un olor (farts always have a smell). shiã ke pe ni ukukuo si ihehewe.

to smell something, to sniff, to sniff (once). ukukuo.

no. kahiti.

it turns out that, as they walked, they fixed the big stone perpendicularly (to the ground). hei tehe maa ke ma pata shatia pemakeherimahe (mit.

to plant, fix, hinge, pin; to fix an object perpendicularly to another; to hook a fishing line to the bottom of the water. thei.

my scalp hurts because of the bee stings. oi nakini ya hesi pe re hushiraruhe.

having experienced a painful sensation due to a superficial injury (an irritation, a tear of the skin, a burn, a blister, etc.). ushirariyo.

there the váquiros had already divided into two parallel rows. kihami ware ke ki yakaroprou waikipara yomawe.

to divide into two parallel rows or lines. yakaroprou.

to paint red, to become red. momihiã.

(he/she) started having a cramp. shi tiatia.

to start having a cramp. tiatia.

to have been cut a portion (of a round object). thakaroa.

I am afraid. kreema natoshi.

to be afraid. kreema.

to introduce a small stick into a burrow to make the animal inside come out. hishãprai.

to introduce a small stick into a burrow to make the animal inside come out. hishãprai.

he climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honey nests that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi".

to climb a very tall tree in order to get oriented. yapeakini.

to dig deeply, to deepen a hole. taromai.

trees (plural). nathohiki.

what noise is that. weti ke the horã.

noise, sound. horã.

to bend, to curve upwards. yãprekeãi.

the canoe capsized. kanawa a he ohorayoma.

to capsize (a canoe). ohorayoma.

Õmawe advanced crouching so as not to be seen and quickly found himself close (to the woman). omawe a ha teretereikuni, a ahetea re shoakeiwei (mit.

to do something quickly. tereterekei.

to be just a little bit soft. fepehehehe.

to be located at the stern of a canoe to steer it; to operate a motor vehicle (neol.). koro te.

wait a little, you will go to see my older brother when night falls. waiha ke the weyai tehe ãiwe ke wa wãri mii kootãyope.

when night falls. kootãyope.

yo saco con una totuma la compota de plátano que está en la olla. hapoka si ha hishimani tate ya u hikeai.

compota de plátano. hishimani.

everyone knows that in all the places I have been, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

it was Nosiriwe who spread tobacco (by planting it in various places). nosiriwe, ihini re nahe paraamapotayoma (mit.

they went to look for termite nests (each to a different place). ã r epo koko pe kãi teapotayo kuhe.

to do something repeatedly in different places. -amapotayo.

and for that reason he remained on guard. the no tapotima.

to recover consciousness, to come to one. tapotima.

to experience a strong stomach pain after a shock or blow. yootho.

we arrived at the place where they usually come for long hunting trips. pe wãri re heniyomopraaiwei ha yamaki warokema.

where they go for long hunting trips. heniyomopraaiwei.

cave or shallow burrow. kotaka.

I approached crouched, above me was a gallineta (bird). ya e ha terekeikuni, hãshimo pe pata yarehetao kuperei.

to be above, to be raised (an object). terekeikuni.

Woman-curare crumbled a piece of her skin and let it fall into the throat of Jaguar's son. mamokoriyoma wãisipi kama si wai ha hushishironi, ira ihirupi kahiki rereope hami e the kemarema.

to crumble, to pulverize with the fingers, to crumble inside the hand. rereope.

he has killed repeatedly. a wãri ishooprou re kupiyei.

to attack or kill repeatedly. ishooprou.

when the child was perched (in the tree), a certain number (of women) stayed behind to bathe. hei ihiru a tiketia ha yaiikuni, ei naha the pe yãrimou ha heikuni.

to climb up, to perch. tiketia.

they went to shoot arrows at the vultures. watupa re ke ki niyãi mi re ukukeiwei.

again I will be the one to shoot arrows at the advancing outsiders. kamiyeni ware ya ki ora niyai koo.

he shot an arrow and it got stuck (in a tree). miha niyãkini shereka a hãkema.

to shoot, to fire an arrow. niyããi.

to mourn, to grieve for the dead. ohotamo.

shamans. kekura.

1. to scrape with the teeth, 2. to scrape the pulp of a fruit with the teeth (to eat it). wahewahemo.

to have swollen eyelids. mamokaki warepiai.

the eye opening reduces (due to swollen eyelids). mamokaki wãkereai.

eye, eyelid, orbit of the eye. mamokaki.

yes. hão.

the hummingbirds perforated the top of the ancestors' skulls and sucked out their brains. poreri ke the he mono ha, teshori peni he tiwehepema, he yoshi pe ukukai shoaoma.

he pierced the jaguar with the tip of a branch. hii ke poko iheteni ira a tiweheamama.

to reach or hit someone/something repeatedly or for an extended duration. tiweherarei.

to bend, curve the tip of an object. toyekou.

to rot, to decompose. poi-.

the father of Kaw (personal name) informed us. kaw kahiki re hiimouweini yamareki yimirama.

father, male elder relative in direct line. kaw.

he does not grow fast. a preprao haiomi.

to grow, to develop; to increase, to intensify; to enlarge, to widen (a cavity). haiomi.

they came here upriver in a canoe to harvest fruits. kanawa ke a ha the pe pehi kãi mi ha yãmoimani the pe ni thaom a.

to go upriver. yãmoimani.

It generally lives in a dry environment. poshotomi ke pe wai hisiempre en un medio seco. It usually enters the sole of the foot or under the nails, where it swells up by filling its abdomen with eggs, and reaches the size of a bean. Generalmente se inhathomai ha kuikuni, poshotomi ke pe maka wai troduce en la planta del pie o bajo las uñas, donha hãepotopi kuaai ha kuikuni (mit. The indigenous people remove these animals with thorns or needles. ): no pasó de aumenta de tamaño al llenar su abdomen mucho tiempo, la tortuga cayó enferma y su de huevos, y alcanza el tamaño de un garbanvientre se hinchó.

to swell up, become swollen. inhathomai.

the path forks. yo shekerewe.

the path forks. shekerewe.

the noise is moving away, diminishing. the ã maanashiaherii.

to diminish gradually (noise, voice). nashiprou.

my younger brother. hepayu.

the trail of the tapirs is very fresh, and their strong smell is felt. ware ke the pe mãyo pata ãhi, ware ke the pe ni pata hirakawe.

to naturally and habitually emanate a strong smell. ni hirakawe.

the tip of the vine forms a hook. thoo thotho ishakoa.

Squirrel retook breath in a vine that hung in the shape of a curl. maari ke thothoku tishokoope ha, wayapashiriwe ke a wãri wãshimi horuma.

to curve, to bend into a hook shape. ishakoa.

the shamans do not cure any sick person, none of them attacks the disease (saying krashi. the pe nohi reai mai, "krashi. while striking it). ", pe kuu mai.

None of them attacks the disease (saying krashi! while striking it). krashi!.

to start listening attentively. yimika hirãrão.

to listen attentively. hirãrã.

it was very hot. totatotaprariyo.

the women went in that direction to break by hand thin sticks for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. urofuro.

my son, here comes the buzzing that precedes (and announces) the arrival of the puriwa. a reãã wã re pariimi ye.

a vivid red decorative element in the headdress of the hekura. puriwa.

Tapara or totuma (container) made from the fruit of the espeshokãtãma plant. Tapara o totuma hecha con el fruto de la planta espeshokãtãma.

Woman, during the waya-shokomomou or a serious conversation (they are the ones who go to fetch water with these taparas). Mujer, durante el waya-shokomomou o una conversación seria (son ellas quienes van a buscar agua con estas taparas).

sorocuá (a type of bird). espeshokãtãma.

Mujer-picure had placed a flat stone on the basket to keep it in place (in the water). maa ke ma resisiweni thomiriyoma yorehi si patetepoma.

flat stone. resisiweni.

firewood. ãkoshoku.

the pulp of those cambures is too hard. hei tate pe re kui pe shãhe amatopi.

to become hard or compact (referring to the pulp of a fruit). amatopiprou.

abraza firmemente el tronco del árbol y corta el bejuco. wa hãyokoã ha rohothoikuni, thoo thotho ta peprari.

to squeeze, to hug, to embrace. hãyokoãi.

Grated cassava dough rolled up to dry over the fire. kohipe (pei): harina de yuca amasada y enrollada para ponerla a secar sobre el fuego.

Pulp of grated cassava. kohi.

grab your bow, it will serve you as a lance to kill babillas. ahe re the hi ta tere, iwa ke wa pe tiwehape.

it will serve you as a lance to kill babillas. tiwehape.

prukai, it. prukai, it. : to be cured several times in a row by a shaman; to be requested several times in a row by a patient that one cures. : ser curado varias veces seguidas por un chamán; ser solicitado varias veces seguidas por un paciente que uno cu.

to cure. cu-.

to wet, to make wet. hereamai.

to lower (something that is too high). yahatotai.

while we walked along the ridge, some went to look for plantains. yamaki ha hesikarini ai peni kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to move along a ridge or mountain crest. hesikarayou.

I was openly hostile, I did not hide that I detested them. ya napemou hitheonomi, ya nape keo ha kuparuni, hekura ai a wai re yãkãreipe nohi wãripou hitheonomi.

to demonstrate hostility, to show malice, to threaten. napemou.

I'm going to mash the seje fruits and dilute the pulp in water. hoko ya mau yaruai.

Brother-in-law, here they purify you (with a liquid). pei ke, shori, wa yaruu ke a kupohei.

to clean the inside of an object, to mash fruit in water. yarurei.

now it is really close, they responded, then their voices were heard close by. yamaki komii kooma, pe the ca; hei tehe the yai ahetewe: ahora está verdadekomii ahetetariyo kurei.

really close. verdadekomii.

to lift, to move a heavy object using a lever. hireprai.

Yãmonãmãriwe was beautiful, was big and had dark skin. yãmonãmãriwe ke a ushuhuwe yarehewe totihitawe no kirii (mit.

to become dark green (tobacco leaves in fields: a sign that the plant is vigorous), to become slightly dark green (tobacco), to have dark skin color, to have dark brown eyes (like most Yanomami people). ushuhu.

go to get water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

go to get water and bring it here. hikepoima.

to be angry. irahenami.

I don't understand the upriver speech very well. Mamisi proinama ama huu wake kuma the pree.

upriver speech. mamisi proinama.

they went to shoot arrows at the vultures. watupa re ke ki niyãi mi re ukukeiwei.

I will be the one to shoot arrows at the advancing outsiders. kamiyeni ware ya ki ora niyai koo.

to shoot an arrow, to launch a projectile. niyãi.

yo estaba convencido de que una serpiente me iba a picar y caminaba con aprensión. oru re ke kini yare si no wetia totihirarepi, ya puhi ha kuni, ya nohi haruapraroma.

to feel anxiety, apprehension; to be jealous. harurei.

to take someone aside to give them information that is meant to be kept secret. makokoaprai.

in an instant we painted our faces black and over that background, we traced sinuous lines with our fingernails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to have had lines traced on one. tikekemokei.

rib. repokosiki.

to wake up, to get up. fhokekou.

the hole closed immediately and Thorupewe metamorphosed. riye wãtetetaruni, thorupewe ke a shi re wãrihiprariyowei.

the hole closed immediately. wãtetetaruni.

to stain or spot in a precise place. hayapishikei.

he went back directly to where he was. a shariria re korãyoherima.

to straighten, to become straight, to go directly towards, to repeat verbatim, to inform correctly. shaririai.

the disease demons weaken me (lit. shawara kini yare waikai.

he lay down after having finished cutting wood. koã ãsho pe ha waikani a perikema.

to kill, to finish off a living being; to complete a task. waikamai.

there, downstream, in the place where they have the habit of fishing. kihi koro totihi ha, yuri pe re kãprããi totihiowehei ha.

to have the habit of leaving something in the same place. kãprããi.

to widen; to make an object with a wide surface. thepahamai.

the men were already far away, they had already set up camp. the pe peria waikikema.

the lizard had already hidden (under something). sharaima aka si poa waikikema.

they were already far away, they had already set up camp. waikikema.

Õmawe and Yoawe discovered the dangerous bamboo tips. omawe ke kipini rahaka ãiãmo ke ki taprai re kupariyouwei (mit.

dangerous bamboo tips. kupariyouwei.

we intend to go towards you dancing (in the indicated way). yamaki niya tirurou re heaimi ye (cha.

to walk backwards, to dance taking steps backwards and forwards. tirurou.

path. himopi.

I'm going to touch your nose with the glans. pe hiyokaki tiprushikei.

to touch with the glans. tiprusha.

to do it quickly. tiketaai.

to light, to set on fire. paraamai.

to be a little long. frapatiwe.

put your two hands there (to receive it), it is a male (who is being born). pe imiki waria ta porakaiku, wãro ke a hoã.

to put the hand on something (sometimes with the intention of stealing), to have the hand placed on something. wariai.

feel headaches after having walked a lot. fnini tirikiai.

visitors have preceded you (lit. pei yo tirikio pario kuhe (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue).

vibrate, experience small shakes; sway. tirikiai.

associated with the howler monkey. iroriw e.

associated with the howler monkey. iroriw.

the vines (that serve to tie) loosen due to the heat of the sun. hotho pe terekou.

loosen. terekou.

at dawn they left, each one on their own, to kill birds (paujíes) (from the result I realized that) their arrows with harpoon points did not miss the target. paruri pe nape ha huomopotuheni, pe the pe no kroshokroshoprao henaopereshi.

to kill birds (paujíes) with arrows. huomopotuheni.

to have a vertigo. mi pe shiwãrihirayou.

to have a vertigo, a dizziness. shiwãrihirayou.

above all, do not come back visiting with empty hands (= without any goods to exchange). shiroko yororotou koo tikootihe.

to adopt a perpendicular position to the ground; to reach the zenith (a star); to stand up. yororãi.

Aheanariwe ran opening a path through the jungle. aheanariwe a rerea he tiherirayoherima.

mythological ancestor. aheanar.

An almost adult monkey or any other arboreal mammal; it corresponds to the adolescence of humans. Mono o cualquier otro mamífero arborícola casi adulto; corresponde a la adolescencia de los humanos.

young. okotoma.

short. foikosi.

to crouch resting the heels on a log, to build a mobile platform of crossed sticks tied with vines to climb a thorny palm trunk, to build a temporary shelter (a child). yarithaai.

reserved. reservan.

when Yoawe saw the woman, he wanted to catch her and transformed into a rock partridge. a niya ha huweani, a hore ehoãmi unaprou shoaoma.

to catch, to trap. unaprou.

that small thing that is carried tucked between the loincloth and the skin (a knife), I have brought this bow to trade for it. fei ihirupi the pe re hãkiãwei ha ya the niya fa ruruani ya the ﬁ pou kuperei.

knife. ruruani.

to do this for a moment. imiprao.

to miss frequently (when shooting). mimri.

puhi. yiki.

to shorten. hokatakei.

the night extended, and then the light came again. the mi titi yopramai ha shoaroher i n i, e the hiwatuprou mi yapaa korãyoma.

to become bright for a moment, to be more luminous for a moment. hiwatutou.

I'm no longer a little one (humorous antithesis, lit. makamakapi ke ya shoawe.

little chick, little bird that still doesn. makamakapi.

quiten las cuerdas de sus arcos. hãto ke nahi pe moroshi ta hayurarihe.

estar tensada (la cuerda de un arco). hãto nahitha pet i a.

bowstring. hãto.

to follow footprints. fmãyo nosi katitipou.

to follow a trail. katitipou.

you will transport the blood in the pot (making several round trips). hapoka si ha wa kore pe teaprarei.

blood clot. korekore.

to soften (referring to smoked game meat when put to cook in water). uhutai.

adolescent human. mãrãnãpi.

the cord of his hammock was about to break. pei pera the peki thapi fetii puﬁo yaro.

cord, rope. fetii.

it seems that they crossed (the river) at the Karepe rapids. karepe pora hami e pe ãhã pekatuatayoma.

to cross. pekatukei.

if you divide what you give (among several people), you will be able to satisfy everyone. shetekewe wa the pe hipeai tehe, wa the pe nohi oa totihimarei.

to possess a part of something among several. shetekemapou.

I took the fish out of the canoe. yuri ya pe hashiriakema.

1. To land, to reach land 2. To take something out of a canoe. hashiriai.

father-in-law, put your hands in front to protect yourself. shoape imiki ta rerekeiku.

when the sky darkens, the apparitions run with their arms in front (to protect themselves). the mi ruwei tehe pore pe imiki rerekewe kãi rereai.

to put one. rerekeo.

to be inferior to, to be shorter than. fawe.

when the cassava is ready to harvest, come down from the mountain (to eat them with us). nashi siki eteoprou tehe eyemi a mi ta wereparu.

when the cassava/yuca is ready to harvest (plural object). eteoprou.

to cut in a circular manner, to remove the damaged or bitten part of a fruit by making a circular incision with the tip of a sharp object. shimoneneãi.

to get close (perfective factitive). prakemakei.

to receive a piece cut in that way. pakaropei.

to bruise an object in one place (by carelessness). wãokoãm.

tomorrow morning we will descend from the mountain. henaha pemaki yohoo henaokiriop e.

we will descend from the mountain tomorrow morning. henaokiriop.

ellos (los dos) no tomaron inmediatamente las plantas de yuca, sólo trajeron raíces. teapi haionomi, e kokoki shiro yehipireherima.

ellos (los dos) no tomaron inmediatamente las plantas de yuca, sólo trajeron raíces. teapi.

although the hekura goes towards you, if it does not intend to go where human beings live, it will turn its head away. y ãnomãmi the nape huu maopehe ha, ihi re a huimama ma kui, a mi re yaithatariyowei.

to turn one. yaithatou.

ribs (bone and flesh). reponahiki.

he hit the rock with his machete, and the pieces flew away. maa ma pe ha sipara a ha tihekikini, the nikashi yuturayoma.

he stumbled. yuturayoma.

en cada lugar donde él se había secado el pene sangrante en los árboles había dejado líneas (rojas) marcadas. pe moroshi iye hãhiope hami hiki tiprutuwe.

penis. hãhiope.

to have very arched eyebrows. fweyomahiki koi watowe.

to be arranged in a circular manner, to form a circular arc. wathowe.

to call someone ãsi, to have this kinship relationship with someone. ãsimou.

to knock down something (e.g. a dangerous insect) with a quick hand gesture, or using an object (a swatter, a lid, etc.). yatheprai.

we have surrounded the collective dwelling. shapono yama a he hithorokopema.

To construct a dwelling with a circular roof in one piece; To fence, surround a dwelling or a person. ithorokomapei.

to divide, distribute several objects. ekererarei.

cut into several pieces (perfective of the durative form). tipururarei.

to sway, to knock against each other (especially when carrying objects on the back). mãiãaimou.

to prepare a substance (curare, a condiment) by leaching, pouring boiling water over a layer of a powdered product. kami.

to take something out of someone. yahaye.

to set on fire. incendiar.

brother-in-law, don't say that, don't say it, turn your head towards the central plaza (= look at me). shori kutihe, kutihe, a mi ta yaiparu (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial.

to turn the head towards, to face. yaiparu.

my sons-in-law offered me pieces of ice. siyoyahe the peni preyura repe kãi re hiyorariyowei.

they offered me. siyoyahe.

Sherekanawe shot an arrow and the tapirs scattered. sherekanawe the niyaprarema, ware ke ki mi yoããma.

disperse (and make parallel rows). pe mi ta yoããheri.

to scatter, disperse (and then walk in parallel following the same direction). yoããi.

to hunt. waika.

an ancestor accompanied the winged termites to the sky and thus saw the souls. poreporeri osheri ke pe rii ha the ha nikereroherini, hetu misi hami no porepi pe tararema.

accompanied the winged termites to the sky. nikereroherini.

he has become angry. a hushutariyo ma.

Verbal suffix indicating a change or transition to a new state or activity, often brief or transitory. -tari.

to be hungry. ãhimopi.

those who knew the region said: "this is the last stream (there is no other)". mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i: "ei re the wai kua waikia kupe".

to be the last, to remain in a surrounding position. ithorokokei.

river of the tapirs. shamata.

to be near. peishoki.

rotten (fibrous material). horepi.

to hit someone in the chest in a downward motion. tuyeparei.

cut into several pieces (perfective of the durative form). tipururarei.

to tell someone to let someone else pass. fhayuamamai.

I will content myself with gutting it. ya shipe niya thaai ha puoni.

did you simply warn him. wa wã fai poohawe.

to content oneself with, to do without concern for consequences, to do without apparent reason. puoni.

to urinate. niyanasi.

ground chili pepper. yãimoro hki.

I absorbed the spicy drink of the foreigners. nape ya no yãimoropi u koama.

ground chili pepper. yãimoro.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass. werereprou.

I gave them (to different people). ya pe hipeakema.

I gave them (to different people). hipeakema.

I approached to put a bamboo point on my arrow, I thrust the point into the shaft and sat down by the fire. yetu ya ki ha tisupani heriye e nahi ha rea shoakema.

to approach one another to confront in combat. tisupani.

upriver, there where there is a sandbank. mrakatahu a re prapohori ha.

upstream, upriver. prapohori.

to have a high and long nose. fhu turerewe.

to have a high and long nose. turerewe.

a little clear (a tint). fereshi.

it fell. hi tiheke i.

to fall. hashishi.

In the forest, the ghosts were heard striking the trees with machetes as they passed. urihi hami pore pe siparamoma: en el bosque se oía a los aparecidos dar, a su paso, golpes de machete a los árboles.

to strike trees with a machete while passing. siparamou.

she left the mark of her passage through the corn field. kihami re mo siki yãrãruã thaa re shoareheriiwei.

to leave a mark on the vegetation when passing through it. yãrãrurei.

a dream made us foresee your arrival. wa thapi kuo shoao k u p r e i.

us. kuo.

it was his older brother who gave food to both of us. pe ãiwepini pehereki iyamama.

he gave food to both of us. ãiwepini.

al que ladra, colócalo alrededor de mi cuello (= dame un perro). hei a re houhoumouwei, pei ya oraki re kui ha a ta rukepari.

to shout while chasing. houhoumou.

come children, stand in the central plaza. ihiru pe, pe ta hehãtaru, pei hapohe.

to stand in the central plaza. hehãtaru.

to keep closed. kahupou.

full. heraho.

to be jealous. wãrikoshiomi.

one after another, they exhausted the firewood. koã ãsho pe mi watheapotayomahe.

they exhausted the firewood. watheapotayomahe.

to be hungry. suhãreãmi.

he is dying. a no prekeherii.

he is dying. prekeherii.

strange; he has chosen a beast. re ke a niyaprarema, shipenapi a yairema.

I have chosen. yai the.

to choose, to select. yairema.

we sat at the edge of the water. yamaki ropariyoma.

to sit or squat at the edge of the water. ropariyo.

to fold longitudinally. waoko.

numerous tracks left by one or several animals. shaiwe.

when I (get old) and start to walk badly (lit. pitha ya pe wãri kapai wãritiai tehe ya yahitheriprope tao ya puhi ha kuni.

to damage, deteriorate, ruin. wãritiai.

while the young men tie leaves (to represent the effigy of an enemy) they will position themselves (lit. huya peni henaki okãihe tehe, mihi ora ke yo ha the iyoa ta paripaharuhe.

to tie, to bind. okãihe.

to bend into a curve. ishako.

I would cry if you went away. wa taprou mararu ya miã ikipe.

to go away. ikipe.

eyelash. mathomatho.

your son. ihiruhe.

he is my son. ihiruye ke a.

they have killed his son. pe ihirupi a sheremahe.

son of a brother (for male speaker) or son of a sister (for female speaker), male child of a parallel cousin. ikayepi.

to reanimate the breathing of a dying person (lit: to raise the breathing). mishiã isimai.

to raise, lift up, put on high. isimai.

the cause of the diversity of birds. nte.

we called each other, we were there. yamaki pokomayoma, yamaki niya ha kokãmoni.

to call each other shouting. pokomayou.

they stayed in the house, they spent the whole night in the house. yahi ha e pe komi hiraoma, yahi ha pe komi he haruma.

to stay in a certain place until dawn. harupei.

retain my songs truly. ware ã ta yua totihitare she.

retain, assimilate (songs, ceremonial speech formulas). totihitare.

to incarnate as a hekura, to behave like a hekura. payemo.

feed them (wayamou, ceremonial dialogue). ke ki ni ta hikãhe.

feed (a very small child by chewing food and giving it mouth-to-mouth); feed (jokingly, during a ceremonial speech). hikãhe.

you, the young ones, go and ambush at the paths (= go and lie in wait at the edges of the paths, in case the enemies arrive). ihiru pe, pei yoka pe hami the ta iyoa ayaapotuhe.

to ambush, to lie in wait. ayaapotuhe.

there is blood in several places (of the forest). iyeiye re pe nohi hirawe kui.

blood. iyeiye.

he felt bliss and sat at the edge of the hammock. the puhi wãri re totihitariyoma, a tipea shoakema.

to feel completely well, to feel satisfaction or bliss, to be happy. tohihita.

to be completely deformed, twisted. kohehewe.

you do not request any goods. matohike wama ãhã poimi.

little brother, if there are chicks, we will claim one. oãsi kakara ihirupi ke pe kua ha, pehe a wãhã wãri pope.

to request, to claim, to solicit. poimi.

cesta de tejido apretado fabricada por las mujeres con el bejuco masimasi. koe hena.

to worsen (when a sick person is exposed to the sun for too long). siper.

the Yanomami had moved away for a while. yãnomãmi ke the ki payeketaa waikikema.

to have moved away for a while. payeketaa.

he abandoned his mats of plantain, and after his departure these became rocks. kuratha siki thaa fa shoakeferini, ketipa re e siki kuprou feoma.

after his/her/its departure. feoma.

to leave something to become deformed or hardened like leather, by tying it with a long rope. prihãkei.

to help someone remember something. ahayepramai.

my eyes became red (after being in the water for a long time). ya mamoku wakepema.

to have reddened eyes; to have the beginning of conjunctivitis. wakerariyo.

to form folds. wãuku.

estos frutos están realmente muy dulces. the ki no kretetio yaiopiwe.

sweet. kretetio.

—Cuñado, ¿de verdad eres tú. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe.

yes. —wa.

it took us a long time to climb the last part of the trail and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain. hesikakei.

the old woman of dark complexion, after they threw her into the water, transformed into a guabina fish. patayoma the rii re potepionowei, pe ha kemapariheni, a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

to become dark, to take on a dark shade, to tan. potepiai.

the supernatural jaguar killed one after another those who had a beautiful face. ira ke henakini the pe puhiki riyehewe re totihii ke the pe katitiaprai ha kuparuni.

killed one after another. katitiaprai.

we heard the enemy warriors when they were crying over the dying person and trying to save him. wayu re pe ã wãri ma teteo tehe, pe wãri ma peyeprayohorayou tehe, yama pe wã hirima.

to try to save. peyeprayohorayou.

to kill a male person. frahaka hãwete.

put bamboo arrowheads on your arrows. rahaka ke a ta hiimahe.

to aim an arrow with a bamboo arrowhead at someone. frahaka puhurai.

bamboo arrowhead. frahaka.

they are surrounding us. pemareki he hãyoprarei ke a kuhahei.

they are surrounding us. hãyoprarei.

goats of blood flowed out continuously from the beehive (of the oi species). oi ke a pata iye presheshou ha kuparuni.

to flow out continuously. presheshou.

in an instant we painted our faces black and on that background, we traced sinuous lines with our nails. yetu ishiishi peni yamaki mi tikekea totihirariyo.

to have those lines traced on the face (perfective aspect of durative). tikekerayou.

truly I have nothing to eat and I wonder what I will do. ina ya moku tuai ma marani.

to have. tuai.

he has intention of coming to attack me with magic plants, that one with the eyes dotted with points. ware a niyã horã ma re henitiiwei, mamo pe wãri re tipikiini.

to have painted dots/circles on the body or face. tipikikei.

the kittens have white spots (separated from each other). mishi ihirupi pe au patihiwe.

spotted, burned in several parts. patihi.

they manipulate the kinship terminology. hiki he wãri tatoatarou peo.

manipulate. tatoatarou.

I clean the tube for inhaling drugs (by removing with a small stick inside). thora ya ka hishãi.

to capture the soldier termites of the foshe aka species by introducing a small stick into their nest (the insects cling to it with their mandibles). foshe aka hishãi.

to tickle by introducing and agitating a thin stick or feather. hishãh.

said of substances that can be mixed. koyokamou.

that is boiling. the yoruu.

effervescent. yorupei.

Cats have a rough tongue. mishi pe aka namo: los gatos tienen la lengua áspera.

rough, prickly, irritating. hotupi.

go to get water and bring it here. mau ta hikepoima.

go to get water and bring it here. hikepoima.

the one that is over there. kihi a re kurahari.

I am the brother of the one hanging over there, in front. kihi a re yãrãhãri, ihi re kamiye ke yaheki.

to be situated at a distance, enfrente or río abajo (downstream) from the speaker. ãhãri.

to gather standing. shirikiãi.

I will not separate from the others (to go live elsewhere), I will go downstream to build a new house (lit. kiha ya e kua kasipariyo, kiha ya e teeteemokiriowe.

sounds made by metallic objects clashing against each other, especially pots when carrying them; clashes produced by poles when dragging several at once on the ground. teeteemorãyou.

we constructed our temporary shelters in the place where they had dug the earth to kill a babilla. iwa a re tishinowehei ha yamaki kumou shoapariyo.

to construct a temporary shelter. tishinowehei.

we will return in the morning tomorrow. henaha pemaki koo henaope.

it was your brother who blackened my face with charcoal this morning. y aiheni, ishiishi peni ware mi thaa henakei kuroi.

at dawn they demanded goods. matohi pe ãhã pou henaomahe.

get up early to go kill an enemy (lit: get up early to go kill a male chácharo). pei waheki rãmi henarayou, waheki ha henarini poshe wãro wahe a niyaprarei.

to do something at dawn or early morning. henaokiriope.

to leave, through negligence, the meat to become worm-infested. moshapimarei.

it is always he who cures me. kamani yare shiro prukai.

to be cured several times in a row by a shaman; to be requested several times in a row by a patient whom one cures successfully. prukai.

they are passing through great scarcity. pe the pe rii no wãrowe ohei totihia.

to begin to have desire. ohei.

to attack someone. nohi nakao.

to attack someone. nakao.

they felt then a great worry (for their children). the pe puhi pruka haruhuprou re shoarayouwei.

to worry about someone. haruhuai.

fruit of the pahakotorawe akasihi tree. pahakotorawe.

to have the forehead painted with a curved line that goes from one ear to the other. tishore.

to clean or polish locally. shutukahekei.

(no clear translation). ãshi.

he went anyway, even though he was told not to do anything about it. the pe ma wasii tehe, a hua he yatirayoma.

to insist on doing something despite being told not to, to do something stubbornly. wasii.

to unleash, to trigger. desencadenar-.

to make something spin with the arm (as when using a sling or bolas); to detach an object that is fixed to another (or to the ground), by pushing it slightly from side to side; to remove a bamboo arrowhead from the shaft in which it is inserted. yãwetãi.

they will shoot multiple arrows at you. wa kãi taitaimai kukeihe.

to shoot multiple arrows at a target. taitaimai.

1. paruri hesikaki yãpou.

Neck and crest skin of the paují bird; bracelet made from them. fipã.

none of us found anything. yamaki no pruka pahateanomi.

to not obtain any result during a search, to work uselessly, to waste time. no pahatea.

the body of Pájaro carpintero enano almost did not take long to turn blue (as if it had been completely covered with bruises). ripuhusiriwe yetu ke a wai hãepotopiai kukema.

to get a bruise. fãepotopi.

(he) transports his two children in the canoe. kanawa a ha pe ihirupi ke kipi tikemapou.

to transport something placed on top of something else; to carry a child seated on top of a load. tikemarema.

to converge, to head towards. puhuraai.

defenderse con valentía durante un ataque. no waiprai.

tomar una defensa (forma incompletiva). no wãrohoãi.

defend. valen-.

the man went in company of the winged termites (mingled with the winged termites). feri ke ki nini thapore tao, wamare noﬁ thaporeri osheri pe rii ha the nikererayoherima.

to mix or mingle with others during travel or migration. nikererayoherima.

prey. váquiros.

do it using force. a ta rohothori.

it is strong. the rohothe.

to strengthen, to make firm. rohothori.

in the water. -pariy.

but, you all did not warn us. yamare wãri yimirãimi yaiwe thawe.

go out first, I will inform you. a ta haa pariri, pe ta yimira.

to inform, warn, advise, notify. yimirama.

just when the fish bit the bait suddenly, I hooked it. yurini ãsitha yomiãi ma tehe ya the yokerema.

to bite suddenly (a fish biting bait). yomi.

I am angry. wãyoãpi ke ya.

to be angry. wãyoãpi.

to cut into several pieces. pakaromai.

after having collected the canes for arrows, we return walking slowly forming a long line that extends. shereka yama he pe ha teararini yamaki opi fririhoherima.

straight mountain range (without ups and downs). fthe matoto fririhiã.

to move in a line, to hang a hammock, to be taut. fririhi.

the women went there to break thin sticks by hand for the roof of the shelters. kihami hurohuro ke a kreamahe, suwe ke peni.

thin and elongated stick, placed transversely on the roof structure of a shelter, to support the leaf covering. kreama.

to give an object in exchange for another. nomihikei.

a creak was heard when the ground began to split. mashitha a hapa hetii tehe the krimou shoarayoma.

creak, crunch. krimou.

that's what I believe. ya the nohi thapou tharei.

to believe, think, say something about someone (often in a ceremonial dialogue). thapouwehei.

he caught several bocones (fish). mãrohã ki pata rekepotii re kupariyowei.

to catch several fish. rekepotii.

a family of freshwater fish. Characidae.

why would I always give my goods without reclaiming anything in return. weti ke the ha shiroko ha ipa ya ki hore totohai ta kutuwe.

without reclaiming anything in return. kutuwe?.

to be outside (plural objects). sipoprawe.

to move over something. eyeeyemo.

he stopped, thirsty, every time he passed near a hollow with dark and foul-smelling water. oyokore re u pe wai potepi papramope hami te pata amishiri roaamai hayuyoma.

stagnant water, contained in hollows and depressions. papramope.

the shamans had cold. okã pe wahaturayoma.

they had cold. wahaturayoma.

I say frankly what I think. ya wã hoyãomi.

1. To speak frankly, not hide what one thinks. 2. To constantly utter death threats.. hoyã.

receiving visitors with shouts and noise. nowã tayou.

the ugly man was sitting alone, at some distance. wãritiwe yãnomãmi a re kui e yãmi roa payekekema.

to damage, deteriorate, ruin; to be bad, ugly, malevolent, evil; to be in bad condition, to be of poor quality. wãriti.

he climbed a tree (and said): "the two hiporo honey nests that are next to each other are not visible". a ha yapeakini : "eyeha hiporo e kipi he hoã re tipeteonowei, ke kipi taproimi".

to climb a very tall tree in order to get oriented. yapeakini.

dar vuelta la cabeza. oraki frikihi.

to turn one. frikihi.

The healers use it to fight the demons of disease, with each machete blow, it's as if lightning fell. ipara tãih i m i: los hekura lo utilizan para combatir a los demonios de la enfermedad, con cada machetazo, es como si cayera un rayo.

saber. ipara.

to happen rapidly in succession. notinotimou.

to empty. proko.

to crush, lacerate, reduce to pieces, crush under weight, let food disintegrate from overcooking. nahihiãmãi.

also the women scratch themselves with a sharp stick during the ritual of their first menstruation. suwe pe yipimou tehe pe kãi hãsikou.

sharp stick, during the unokãimou ritual [to scratch oneself repeatedly, to keep scratching oneself throughout the ritual]. fãsiki.

the mosquitoes do not let (one) sleep. ukushi peni the mipramaimi.

to leave (something undone). pramai.

went around, went to call the shaman. herani, ira a horomirema.

went around, made a detour. herani.

(speech from upriver). kririri.

a long line. prihai.

to have a light complexion. prushishiwe.

light-colored, pale. prushishi.

banana plantation. kuratha siki.

cane plantation for arrows. haprua ma siki.

The totality of the skin. Set of certain plants (those that have si as a classifier): bananas, palms, cassava plants, cane plantations for arrows, etc.. tesiki.

the spider curled up in its translucent hammock (asks). yiipi pata wararawe kuwe ha hãhãrãmãethawe ke a wãri ha puushitaoni.

spider. yiipi.

los niños se trepaban a los árboles (con argollas colocadas alrededor de los tobillos). hii ke hi pe ha ihiru pe re torerouwei.

a su vez, Pájaro carpintero trepó enseguida. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri torerea re mahikeiwei (mit.

to roll, to make roll. pruru.

to call someone father-in-law, to be in a son/daughter-in-law relationship with someone. shiimou.

he wants to go live elsewhere, what does he have against me. yare thapi heiaprarai, weti ke the no peshiri ha thaani.

why do you feel resentment towards my mother-in-law. weti the ha wa no peshiri thaai ma ta thawe, yaahe.

to feel regret or resentment for the loss of an object (lost, stolen, broken); to feel resentment or bitterness towards someone. thaani.

the daughter of Venado showed her the manaka palms. hayariwe ke theepini manaka siki a himikema.

showed. imikema.

to extend (a flexible thing), to stretch a liana between two banks to cross a stream. fririhimakei.

(habla de río arriba.). hãsini.

the burning heat of the house has spread beyond (its limits). yahi a heyoshi he re toreparuhe ye.

to go beyond, to surpass limits. torepa.

to strike with a machete, to cut with a machete. krashikrashimou.

sostienen el techo de la casa de los antepasados. the ki rahakapi makekeprarou yaioma.

to hold up. makekeprarou.

morning demons: supernatural beings of the yai the class; they pass at dawn and when they pass again at dusk they are called weyari. harikari: los demonios de la mañana, seres sobrenaturales de la clase yai the; pasan al amanecer y cuando vuelven a pasar al atardecer se llaman weyari.

morning demons, supernatural beings. harikari.

the cambur compote is becoming completely homogeneous. tate uku si uhutitiai.

to become completely soft or homogeneous (for a liquid or powder). uhutitiprou.

to become silent, to cease (noise). waiprou.

lie down. a ta periiku.

accompany us, we will return tomorrow. a ta yauiku, henaha pemaki koãkoã shoapei.

perfective aspect marker for intransitive verbs. iku.

to form several separate groups. rãikiprawe.

animal that lives in a tree (unidentified). koweteroma.

there is a bee's nest (hanging), we (you and I) will go burn it. kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

to build a hanging nest (birds, insects). yaumou.

prenda de vestir, pieza de tela. iro.

they placed mapires full of wapu fruits on the ground. wapu ke pe ithãun diamahe, yorehi pe ha.

to descend, to go down. ithãun.

to teach to walk, to make go, to tell to go somewhere. humai.

clay used to make pots. fapoka.

to occur momentarily. hishikitou.

Jaguar dormía con la cabeza volcada. ncima ira a miã kãi mi pata hore nonopraoma.

Jaguar. ncima.

look at me. a mi ta yaitaru.

to turn one. atha.

he was brushing against the two women who were walking with their arms around each other's shoulders. suwe ke kipi ipihiaprarope hami a pakihiapraroma.

to walk with arms around each other. ipihio.

Shapo konayoma (a female spirit) sat near me farting. shapo konayoma ke a ha rotaparuni, a shiã keyeheroma (cha.

farts. pedos.

fireflies, glow worms. purima ãhuku.

the woman was sitting on the sand. mrakatahu a kuope ha suwe a tirereoma.

to sit down on the ground. tirerekei.

to dance in the central plaza during a celebration with another community, to participate in a presentation dance. shuwahimou.

they were the first to climb, and many Yanomami climbed after them. pe tua ha pariikutuni, pruka yãnomãmi the pe tuo re hepariyonowei.

after them. hepariyonowei.

I make several holes in the ground by sinking a stick into it. hii hini mashitha ya hiwehai.

I assure you that in all the houses where the "Whites" have not come to inject, the Yanomami have died. nape peni the pe hiwehai re mahei a yahi re kuprai, the ki mrao totihio piyekeomopotayo ma re kui.

to pierce, to bore, to perforate by pressing with the hand (applying repeated blows); to give an injection, to inject. hiweheai.

fohi himou: to manifest that one is hungry. fohi himou: manifestar que se tiene hambre.

to proclaim. himou.

to bruise an object in several places. wãokopramai.

I don. siekeekeemi.

to put, arrange, or cut to the same measure (perfective, plural object). manikiakei.

in the places where Nosiriwe had spat, tobacco plants began to sprout spontaneously. nosiriwe ke kahu upe kesheoheripe hami pee ke nahe mo urerou yauaherima.

to occur spontaneously, to happen as a consequence. yauaherima.

walk like peas, one after the other in a long line (in silence). hawe poshe ke wamaki shaninia prihãã ha totihii.

to become deformed, to become hard like leather, to twist. prithothoai.

(upriver speech). prukima ãsi.

(upriver speech). prukima.

Sorocuá advanced staggering, and then collapsed. kurekurethawe re e krei re kuaaheriiwei, a shea shoaparema.

to stagger, to sway back and forth; to tilt, to lean forward and backward; to sway, to rock, to totter, to stagger in a threatening way. kuaaheriiwei.

they are all present in a house or camp. weti ipa a totoa ta fenapa (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. They are there. ): vienda o en un campamento.

to be present. faii.

the rope of the canoe is not untied. kanawa a natha kusheami.

to untie, to undo (a knot). kusheami.

then they said: "they sleep near here" (= they will arrive soon). pe nowã thamahe.

they said. thamahe.

to eat a food by cutting it with the incisors, to eat a cambur in that way. weheriai.

to go in search of the pei mi ãmo stolen from a person to return it to them. mi ãmo koãi.

if the shamans take possession of a pei mi ãmo, you cannot make mistakes, you immediately identify its smell. hekura peni the mi ãmo tema, wãri re wa yakei mai, ihi re the ki ni rukea katitia re shoarayouwei (cha.

the immaterial component of the human person (lit.: the center). mi ãmo.

to be afraid. ãtiãti.

to help someone free themselves from being restrained. hukepramai.

the child, who was clever, passed (from the basket where he was) to a tree and stayed perched there. keo heoma (mit.

child. keo.

the woman who was having her first menstruation, and who was isolated behind the menstrual leaves, came out without anyone noticing. yipi re henaki hishomi ha ai re a suwe re yipimouwei, a haa hãthorema.

to have one. yipimouwei.

small bird. yimikaki seserewe.

bird. seserewe.

do not let yourself be heard by the women (lit. suwe pe iha a wã hirimotihe.

do not let yourself be heard. hirimotihe.

he laughed mockingly again. a nokã ikãi kooma.

to laugh, laughter. nokã.

I'm going to kick you. pe kahathorei.

"What if I kick him. "ya wãri ta kahatho sho. ". ".

to want to kick someone. kahathou.

to have been piled up, to have been heaped up. eruyutua.

the pot is hung crooked. toutami si yauo akarewe.

there is a bee nest (hung), we (you and I) will go burn it. kopina ke a yaua kupe, pehe a hisikayorupe.

to be hung, to have been hung. yauami.

to tell someone to pretend not to know. wã mohotumomai.

to deny one. mohotumomai.

to declare that one wants to kill someone. warapa.

to kick, to stomp on. kaisa.

they (the two) renounced their plan just like that. ke kipi kuyea ha paririni.

to renounce, to change one. kuyerayou.

one: singular object; one. mãhu: objeto singular; uno.

one. mãhu.

wild yams (plural). mamohiyomi ke ki.

wild yam (Dioscoreaceae), with dark gray pulp. mamohiyomi.

to draw a thick line around the mouth with blood. kahiki warukuo.

to draw a thick line around the mouth. waruku.

to snort (once). rekukãi.

they asked him to accompany them when they went to a momo fruit feast organized by the souls. no porepi ke peni momo ke a ha the pe shoaihe tehe, a nokamapomahe.

to accompany. shoaihe.

arrugar la frente. huko siki riiki.

haber arrugado la frente (perfecto). huko siki riikikei.

arrugar la frente por un breve instante. huko siki riikitou.

arrugar la frente. riiki.

to be angry. rutaruta.

(he) lives in a place where no 'White' person lives. peria re mare hami a yahi re ithãprai.

to get up from the hammock to make room for a guest; to place several containers on the ground; to plant several objects vertically in the ground. ithãprai.

they kicked the excrement. kohoromi shipe kayoamahe.

to kick, reject or displace with the foot. kayoai.

to be blunt (a spearhead). wahotowe.

to have surpassed (in height), to have become bigger than. parorayou.

to become stiff, to stiffen (under the effect of an effort). hiraraai.

they have the custom (the hekura) of coming to my house to take hallucinogens of good quality. ipa a wayu nohi ta toayoruu tharahei (cha.

to take hallucinogens of good quality. toayoruu.

to enumerate, to count using the fingers. fimiki kuprou.

to enumerate, to count using the fingers. karo.

how my kidneys hurt. fpoushokuye yai.

how my kidneys hurt!. fpoushokuye.

to be red/reddish in color. momihiwe.

to give little shouts (referring to). keekeemo.

my hands regularly go numb. ya imiki puhi mratamratamou.

to regularly go numb, to have a body part that regularly goes numb. mratimratimou.

I will not go to visit you anymore (lit. pe kurathapi si wai mii mai ke the.

banana/plantain. kurathapi.

to brace oneself on one's feet (to make an effort). mamiki hitatao.

to become stiff, to become rigid. hitata.

to remove a tooth from the jaw (especially an incisor of the picure, to make a burin). yayetimai.

catch knife fish and lick those leaves that are crowded together there, and then lick the juice of the cooked (fish) that comes out of them. waho wa ki ha shaireni, ei henaki re yorukurati, henaki ta nakoari.

to catch fish by pulling on a line. shaireni.

to make dry by smoking. tetekemapei.

discard them (the váquiros), since they are not fat. wama pe hoyaa ha shoakihe, pe wãri tapio no ma re mai.

discard them. shoakihe.

the arrow missed the target (lit. shereka a yakerayoma.

to make a mistake, to miss a target. yakei.

to compress, to curl up. hikoãi.

these ripe fruits are truly tasty. the wai wake wãnihitawe yai.

of good quality, tasty. wãnihitawe.

it took us a long time to reach the last part of the journey and, when we reached the top of the mountain, they went to look for bananas. yãkumi yamaki ha poushukuprarutuni, yamaki ha hesikaikutuni, kuratha a nape ayouhe.

we stopped for a good while at the top (of the. hesika hami yamaki uprahataoma.

to reach the top of a hill or mountain, to move along a ridge. hesikai.

there where the ãpuri tree rises, there where a koshiro bee nest is found, I will go to collect honey (lit. ei ãpuri hi re uprayahi, ei koshiro a re rorati, a ma tirerati ha, ya pehi kãi ha pereni, ya naki ta ruwemoma.

to destroy a beehive to harvest honey (lit.: to deprive of warmth). ruwemomai.

I'm going to prepare moriche fruits (by softening them in water). eweshi ya uku ta furukuku.

he crushed leaves with his fingers several times in a row (to have good luck in the search for honey). yãã ke henaki wãri ha hurukutaararini.

to crush by rubbing with the fingers; to crumble in the hand, to crush leaves when abandoning a path for good luck during a search. furukuku.

everyone knows that in all the places I have gone, people have eaten meat thanks to me. ya the ki ni tehia totihiamapotayo ma re kuhe.

start running quickly (each one in a different direction). pe ta rereo shoaomopotu.

to do the same task in different places (by multiple groups or the same subject repeatedly). -omopotayo.

small species of cachicamo (unidentified animal). ipi.

to weed. kau.

bring here your ugly twisted arrows. eyeha re ke ki kãi wãri parokowe ta yehipoyo.

slightly curved, having a slightly curved shape. parokorayou.

to stop abruptly (an animal). hothoprakei.

to lack what is necessary to carry out a task. fimiki nohi wapeo.

to lack what is necessary to carry out a task. nihi.

we slept in Tayari, in that place is where we built shelters to spend the night. tayari ha yamaki mioma, ihami yamaki perimoma.

to install oneself to spend the night, to build a temporary shelter. perimou.

frec. suwe thaaprai.

to have the habit of using magic substances (heri) against women. thaa.

the danta was full of ticks. shama a toripioma.

to have ticks, to be infested with ticks. shihe.

to become barely perceptible to the senses (hearing, sight, taste). manashiray.

mientras trepaba a lo largo del tronco, Pájaro carpintero se detuvo en diferentes puntos. eshãmiriwe ke a yeteatarou kuaaherima.

Pájaro carpintero buscó luego dirigiendo la mirada en esa dirección. eshãmiriwe kihami ke a mamo huprou piyekoma.

Pájaro carpintero estaba sin apoyo (en la punta del árbol) y estiraba el cuello girando la cabeza en todas las direcciones. eshãmiriwe ke a wãri mãroko oraki katiapraroma.

Pájaro carpintero (a mythological ancestor). eshãmiriwe.

to be riddled with holes or punctures. ereshãrayou.

he piled them up quickly on a leaf and gave them to him. yãã hena ha the pe ha poshoshotamakini, e the hipekema.

to pile up, to heap up. poshoshokei.

upriver speech. fii theri.

very early in the morning she hung the package from the rope of her father's hammock (near the fire) (in upriver speech). pe fii ke pekithapi ha a hãro yaua re feamapeiwei.

upriver people, mountain people. fii.

he also put his hands on the front posts of the roof. hehã nahi pe hami kãi imiki wai wariataroma.

he also put his hands on the front posts of the roof. wariataroma.

to be tied/closed in that manner, plural objects, disposed. he itutuprawe, pl.

to be tied/closed in that manner. itutuwe.

"those are the enemy warriors who shout to attract us", we said. "wayu peni pemareki hoã pokomaihe", yamaki kuma.

to shout to attract or gather. pokomaihe.

to become beautiful, final stage of a process. friyeheprou.

he was wearing cotinga blue feather earrings (lit. heimi siki reikimapoma.

it is in that direction where a small path (that leads into this larger one we are on) is found. ihi the re kure hami yo wai reikia kure.

to slide, to dangle, to hang. rei.

the siparariwe fish are full of bones. siparariwe pe niosipi.

to be full of fish bones. niosipi.

above that waterfall was where, being a child, I really woke up. ihi a pora feaka ha, the puﬁ moyawea totihirihe.

above, on top of. feaka.

to be always going and coming despite extreme thinness (joking). mi shoeshoeãprarou.

to become thin, to lose weight, to have a sunken belly. shoeke.

our song, whose intensity varies, is directed towards you. yamaki ã mohe hotehaimi ye (cha.

to vary in intensity (noise). hotehaimi.

It nests in the hollows of the trunks. Anida en los huecos de los troncos.

nests. Anida.

to make frequent mistakes while speaking; to get tangled up repeatedly during a ceremonial dialogue. hãrohãi.

I would have liked to visit them, but the gossip dissuaded me (lit. e ki ha ya humapi rea re kure (wayamou, diálogo ceremonial. : the gossip made me turn my back). ).

gossip, rumor. ãwãã.

my daughter-in-law. yuhaye.

he has arrived. he potoshi.

to have arrived. potoshi.

arrow with bamboo point. makepou mi pao thare ke.

arrow. makepou.

Frog arched its back urinating to put out the fire. prueheyoma ke, e naha niaasi pe kãi mi hiketeapraroma, wake niya misi ha ruamani.

to arch forward, to arch the hips forward. hiketeãi.

a type of bird, the great antshrike (Taraba major). batara.

the man arrived at a place where spirits lived. rea, tia warokema.

to live in, to inhabit different places. tia.

the thomoro tree dominates the surrounding vegetation. thomoro a morokowe.

dominate by size, be larger than. morokowe.

his two younger brothers returned from hunting. pe feeshe e kipi rami kopema (habla de río arriba.

your younger male relative, your younger brother. feeshehe.

object that can be worked by nibbling with the incisors. washishamou.

we followed the watercourse downstream and discovered a large number of paujíes. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. kirio.

to slide, slip, tumble down a slope (plural subject). fkahehe.

I am the honey and my honeycombs are empty. husira ya kua, ya no ohea ke a kure.

I really want to go relieve myself. ya shi ihe totihiwe ma ta yaitani.

I am someone different (= I am not who you think I am). shomi ke ya rii.

I. husira.

1. To cut a tree as close to the ground as possible, leaving a short stump. 2. To make an arrowhead from bamboo that is too short, failing to make it thin and sharp. manakoroai.

to register, to wake up. moyaweai.

to be very noisy, to make a lot of noise. horerehorere.

to be continuously roasting plantains over the embers. yatayatamai.

I'm going to try it right away. ya the ta wapeprao sho.

First I'm going to test the quality of the malefic product with Tuqueque. rehariwe iha heri ya ki ta wapai pario sho.

to try, attempt, dare; to experience, test, taste; to compare, measure. wapai.

ashes. urihi.

(perfective form of kaoai) made enter by force. kaokei.

to tap or flick with the fingers on an object to remove dirt or insects, for fun to tap a termite nest with the hand so that the termites fall on someone. yoothopei.

I will go to look for powerful hekuras at their houses, and I will direct them towards you (making them rotate). wãfã yamaki ukai ha kuparuni, ya pe pehi kãi komi hãmoriã shoakeyoruu e.

to make something cylindrical or approximately round pivot or rotate on itself, making it describe less than a half turn. hãmoriã.

to offer several parts; to divide, separate into several parts (with plural object). shekereakei.

to bend, to twist. kohehãi.

to produce several portions by tearing, separating or pulling apart a round object with both hands in opposite directions. hahathomai.

they (the two) renounced their project right away. ke kipi kuyea ha paririni.

to renounce, to give up. paririni.

(related form of yakeke). namo ka yakeke.

some hekura hunters of danta joined the son of Õmawe (whom I possess as hekura, in my chest) and that is the reason why I am still a good hunter. omawe pe ihirupi iha shama niyatimi a ha ithooproni, ya the pe yaropi niyãi nosiye.

that is the reason. ithooproni.

the jaguar died there, only its bones remain. kihami ira ke a nomarayou no kureshi, pei ke u pe shiro hiraa kurarei.

to die, to disappear suddenly. marayou.

(lightning). mi yãmirã.

lightning. yãmirã.

put your buttocks on the leaves. rahara ke ki re kuamishi hena ha koroku ta pako heiku.

the rear part of a canoe; to walk behind. korokei.

the old woman of dark complexion, after they threw her into the water, transformed into a guabina fish. patayoma the rii re potepionowei, pe ha kemapariheni, a ishawaritomiprariyoma.

to have a dark complexion, to be dark. potepionowei.

one of the cries of the cranes. turiturimo.

to make many, to fabricate in large quantities. yateheprai.

go to lie down over there in front. a ta periikuhuru.

go to lie down over there in front or upriver. periikuhuru.

to build several temporary shelters or several camps (at different times) in the same place. fyãno yarikamai.

to hit someone repeatedly with a stick or club. yarikayou.

to swell (foot of a person). shekeke.

the plumes of the crested curassow surround the base of its arpoon points, observe them well. ãyokoro hami pe no ikimoipi ãyoyowe no ta tare she.

the base of its arpoon points. ikimoipi.

when the husband went hunting, Siroromi had the habit of coming to make love with the wife during his absence. pe heãropi e rãmi huaai tehe siroromi a kotããi yaimou ha heani, pe suwepi e na wai heama.

to hunt. frãmi.

the dog was called Tokorinawe, it was truly very large. hiima tokorinawe a wãhã re kuowei, the pata kuwe totihiweni.

tree; Cecropia orinocensis (Cecropiaceae). tokori.

when you collected the bones of the cremated dead, did you carefully search (among the ashes and earth, so as not to forget anything). yupu wama ushiki taeai ha wamaki proruruprou thawe.

to search for scattered or mixed fragments. prorurou.

to wrap hastily or carelessly. hãrotai.

the jaguar roared, its tail shook. yashuma: el jaguar rugió, su cola se estremeció.

to tremble, to shiver, to shake (from cold or due to an illness). yatiyatimo.

a tree for gathering its fruits. mãhokei.

to cause blisters. poshomararei.

The bushes hold the roof leaves in place. Hiyehiyema shiki masiko pe.

branches or bushes placed on a roof to hold the leaves in place. hiyehiyema.

in the shapono for a moment they felt sleepy and were heard snoring. shapono hami no owe ke the pe maharishitou ha yaironi, pe hohoruãma.

to feel sleepy. maharishii.

to be angry. rakiraki.

To suffer from a stomach ache. ãmoku nini: sufrir del estómago.

To suffer from (stomach ache). ãmoku ninimou: padecer de.

stomach ache. ãmoku nini.

to blow a hallucinogen into the neck of a gourd containing a shaman's ashes, before consuming them in a banana porridge. fhishima he horai.

to break a funerary gourd (to burn it) after having consumed the ashes it contained. fhishima sheai.

ceremonial gourd containing the ashes of a deceased person. fhishima.

you (plural) will stop having hunger. wamaki wãri naiki mraape.

hunger. mraape.

supernatural being associated with lightning. tãhirawe.

clay pot. hapoka.

to shorten a strap. yekehiai.

to paint oneself on the face with lines. tiporeo.

the kittens have white spots (separated from each other). mishi ihirupi pe au patihiwe.

to have scattered spots or burns. patihiwe.

